[1]. [*Hydrodynamic Theory of Two-dimensional Chiral Malthusian Flocks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17762 "Hydrodynamic Theory of Two-dimensional Chiral Malthusian Flocks")
Leiming Chen, Chiu Fan Lee, John Toner
We study the hydrodynamic behavior of two-dimensional chiral dry Malthusian flocks; that is, chiral polar-ordered active matter with neither number nor momentum conservation. We show that, in the absence of fluctuations, such systems generically form a ``time cholesteric", in which the velocity of the entire system rotates uniformly at a fixed frequency b. Fluctuations about this state belong to the universality class of (2+1)-Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation, which implies short-ranged orientational order in the hydrodynamic limit. We then show that, in the limit of weak chirality, the hydrodynamics of a system with reasonable size is expected to governed by the linear regime of the KPZ equation, exhibiting quasi-long-ranged orientational order. Our predictions for the velocity and number density correlations are testable in both simulations and experiments.

[2]. [*Exact results on the hydrodynamics of certain kinetically-constrained hopping processes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17806 "Exact results on the hydrodynamics of certain kinetically-constrained hopping processes")
Adam J. McRoberts, Vadim Oganesyan, Antonello Scardicchio
We consider a model of interacting random walkers on a triangular chain and triangular lattice, where a particle can move only if the other two sites of the triangle are unoccupied -- a kinetically-constrained hopping process (KCHP) recently introduced in the context of non-linear diffusion cascades. Using a classical-to-quantum mapping -- where the rate matrix of the stochastic KCHP corresponds to a spin Hamiltonian, and the equilibrium probability distribution to the quantum ground state -- we develop a systematic perturbation theory to calculate the diffusion constant; the hydrodynamics of the KCHPs is determined by the low-energy properties of the spin Hamiltonian, which we analyse with the standard Holstein-Primakoff spin-wave expansion.
  For the triangular hopping we consider, we show that \textit{non-interacting} spin-wave theory predicts the \textit{exact} diffusion constant. We conjecture this holds for all KCHPs with (i) hard-core occupancy, (ii) parity-symmetry, and (iii) where the hopping processes are given by three-site gates -- that is, where hopping between two sites is conditioned on the occupancy of a third. We further show that there are corrections to the diffusion constant when the KCHP is described by \textit{four}-site gates, which we calculate at leading order in the semi-classical $1/S$ expansion. We support all these conclusions with numerical simulations.

[3]. [*Quantum Geometric Injection and Shift Optical Forces Drive Coherent Phonons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17814 "Quantum Geometric Injection and Shift Optical Forces Drive Coherent Phonons")
J. Luke Pimlott, Habib Rostami
We identify {\em injection} and {\em shift} rectified Raman forces, which are phononic counterparts of the photogalvanic effect, that drive lattice vibrations and trigger transient emergent properties. These forces are governed by the {\em quantum geometric tensor}, a {\em phononic shift vector}, and interband asymmetries in the electron-phonon coupling. The injection force acts displacively, while -- unlike conventional impulsive mechanisms -- the shift force emerges impulsively in the resonant interband absorbing regime when time-reversal symmetry is broken. Using the bilayer Haldane model, we quantify the injection and shift forces acting on interlayer shear phonons through both analytical and numerical methods. Strikingly, we reveal strong tunability, both in magnitude and direction, of the rectified forces by varying the driving frequency and magnetic flux, uncovering a distinct quantum geometric mechanism for ultrafast and coherent manipulation of quantum materials.

[4]. [*Higher Chern bands in helical homotrilayer transition metal dichalcogenides*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17819 "Higher Chern bands in helical homotrilayer transition metal dichalcogenides")
Jungho Daniel Choi, Nicol\'as Morales-Dur\'an, Yves H. Kwan, Andrew J. Millis, Nicolas Regnault, Daniele Guerci
We propose helically twisted homotrilayer transition metal dichalcogenides as a platform for realizing correlated topological phases of matter with higher and tunable Chern numbers. We show that a clear separation of scales emerges for small twist angles, allowing us to derive a low-energy continuum model that captures the physics within moir\'e-scale domains. We identify regimes of twist angle and displacement field for which the highest-lying hole band is isolated from other bands and is topological with $K$-valley Chern number $C=-2$. We demonstrate that varying the displacement field can induce a transition from $C=-2$ to $C=-1$, as well as from a topologically trivial band to a $C=-1$ band. We derive an effective tight-binding description for a high-symmetry stacking domain which is valid for a wide range of twist angles, and we show that the $C=-2$ band can remain stable at filling fraction $\nu=-1$ in the presence of interactions in Hartree-Fock calculations.

[5]. [*Proximity-induced flat bands and topological properties in a decorated diamond chain*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17821 "Proximity-induced flat bands and topological properties in a decorated diamond chain")
K Shivanand Thakur, Vihodi Theuno, Amrita Mukherjee, Biplab Pal
In the present study, we propose a unique scheme to generate and control multiple flat bands in a decorated diamond chain by using a strain-induced proximity effect between the diagonal sites of each diamond plaquette. This is in complete contrast to the conventional diamond chain, in which the interplay between the lattice topology and an external magnetic flux leads to an extreme localization of the single-particle states, producing the flat bands in the energy spectrum. Such a strain-induced proximity effect will enable us to systematically control one of the diagonal hoppings in the decorated diamond chain, which will lead to the formation of both gapless and gapped flat bands in the energy spectrum. These gapless or gapped flat bands have been corroborated by the computation of the compact localized states amplitude distribution as well as the density of states of the system using a real space calculation. We have also shown that these flat bands are robust against the introduction of small amounts of random onsite disorder in the system. In addition to this, we have also classified the nontrivial topological properties of the system by calculating the winding numbers and edge states for the gapped energy spectrum. These findings could be easily realized experimentally using the laser-induced photonic lattice platforms.

[6]. [*Magnon topology driven by altermagnetism*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17822 "Magnon topology driven by altermagnetism")
Subhankar Khatua, Volodymyr P. Kravchuk, Kostiantyn V. Yershov, Jeroen van den Brink
Altermagnets present a new class of fully compensated collinear magnetic order, where the two sublattices are not related merely by time-reversal combined with lattice translation or inversion, but require an additional lattice rotation. This distinctive symmetry leads to a characteristic splitting of the magnon bands; however the splitting is only partial -- residual degeneracies persist along certain lines in the Brillouin zone as a consequence of the underlying altermagnetic rotation. We consider a two-dimensional $d$-wave altermagnetic spin model on the checkerboard lattice and introduce additional interactions such as an external magnetic field and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions, that lift these degeneracies. The resulting magnon bands become fully gapped and acquire non-trivial topology, characterized by nonzero Chern numbers. We demonstrate the crucial role of altermagnetism for the generation of the Berry curvature. As a direct consequence of the topological magnons, we find finite thermal Hall conductivity $\kappa_{xy}$, which exhibits a characteristic low-temperature scaling, $\kappa_{xy}\propto T^4$. Moreover, $\kappa_{xy}$ changes sign under reversal of the magnetic field, exhibiting a sharp jump across zero field at low temperatures. We also demonstrate topologically protected chiral edge modes in a finite strip geometry.

[7]. [*Two-dimensional nonlinear dynamical response of the magnetoelectrically driven dimerized spin-$1{/}2$ chain*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17823 "Two-dimensional nonlinear dynamical response of the magnetoelectrically driven dimerized spin-$1{/}2$ chain")
Wolfram Brenig
A study of the dynamical two-dimensional (2D) nonlinear response of the dimerized spin-$1{/}2$ chain to external electric fields is presented. The coupling of the spin system to those fields is set to arise from the inverse Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. In the XY-limit, we provide analytical expressions for the second-order nonlinear dynamical response function. Apart from multi spinon continua, this response displays a strong antidiagonal, i.e. galvanoelectric, feature in the 2D frequency plane. This allows to read off scattering rates of the fractional spinon excitations. For the XXZ-case, we focus on the interaction-driven renormalization of the light-matter coupling by considering vertex corrections which are induced by the zz-exchange. We show this renormalization to modify the spinon joint density of states significantly, potentially allowing for the formation of in-gap bound states. As a result, the vertex corrected light-matter coupling can induce a dramatic spectral weight transfer to lower energies for the dynamical response function within the 2D frequency plane.

[8]. [*Hydrodynamics without Averaging -- a Hard Rods Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17827 "Hydrodynamics without Averaging -- a Hard Rods Study")
Friedrich H\"ubner
On the example of the integrable hard rods model we study the quality of the (generalized) hydrodynamic approximation on a single coarse-grained sample. This is opposed to the traditional approach which averages over an appropriate local equilibrium state. While mathematically more ambiguous, a major advantage of the new approach is that it allows us to disentangle intrinsic diffusion from `diffusion from convection' effects. For the hard rods we find intrinsic diffusion is absent, which agrees with and clarifies recent findings. Interestingly, the results also apply to not locally thermal states, demonstrating that hydrodynamics (in this model) does not require the assumption of local equilibrium.

[9]. [*Comparative analysis of plasmon modes in layered Lindhard metals and strange metals*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17840 "Comparative analysis of plasmon modes in layered Lindhard metals and strange metals")
Niels de Vries, Jin Chen, Eric Hoglund, Xuefei Guo, Dipanjan Chaudhuri, Jordan Hachtel, Peter Abbamonte
The enigmatic strange metal remains one of the central unsolved problems of 21st century science. Understanding this phase of matter requires knowledge of the momentum- and energy-resolved dynamic charge susceptibility, $\chi(q,\omega)$, especially at finite momentum. Inelastic electron scattering (EELS), performed in either transmission (T-EELS) or reflection (R-EELS) geometries, is a powerful probe of $\chi(q,\omega)$. For the prototypical strange metal Bi$_2$Sr$_2$CaCu$_2$O$_{8+x}$, T-EELS, R-EELS, and infrared (IR) spectroscopy agree at $q \sim 0$, all revealing a highly damped plasmon near 1 eV. At larger $q$, however, EELS results show unresolved discrepancies. Since IR data are highly reproducible, it is advantageous to use IR data to calculate what the expected EELS response should be at modest $q$. Building on prior R-EELS work [J. Chen \textit{et al.}, Phys. Rev. B. \textbf{109}, 045108 (2024)], we extend this approach to T-EELS for finite stacks of metallic layers, comparing a "textbook" Lindhard metal to a strange metal. In the Lindhard case, the low-$q$ response is dominated by long-lived, standing wave plasmon modes arising from interlayer Coulomb coupling, with in-plane dispersions that resemble the well-known Fetter modes of layered metals. This behavior depends only on the geometry and the long-ranged nature of the Coulomb interaction, and is largely insensitive to layer details. At larger $q$, the response reflects the microscopic properties of individual layers. For the strange metal, calculations based on IR data predict a highly damped plasmon with weak dispersion and no distinct surface mode. While our results match IR and R-EELS at low $q$, they do not reproduce any published EELS spectra at large $q$, highlighting unresolved discrepancies that demand further experimental investigation.

[10]. [*Sb2S3 and GaAs Absorber Layer-based Quantum Dot Solar Cells with Cadmium Telluride-based HTL: A Comparative Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17877 "Sb2S3 and GaAs Absorber Layer-based Quantum Dot Solar Cells with Cadmium Telluride-based HTL: A Comparative Study")
Sayak Banerjee (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India-342037, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India), Anupam Chetia (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India-342037), Satyajit Sahu (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India-342037)
Quantum dot solar cells (QDSC) are widely acknowledged to be one of the best solar energy harvesting devices in the present world. Absorber layer is a core component of a QDSC with a strong influence on its operational efficiency. Hence, we choose to undertake a comparative study of two QDSC having different QD absorber layers: Sb2S3 and GaAs with the motive to identify the better absorber layer material. The numerical analysis has been carried out using SCAPS-1D (Solar Cell Capacitance Simulator-1D). The structure of the QDSCs under study are: FTO/TiO2/CdS/Sb2S3/CuI/C and FTO/TiO2/CdS/GaAs/CuI/C. Critical parameters, including temperature, back contact work function, series and shunt resistances, were meticulously adjusted in the simulations, demonstrating that the maximum efficiency attained by Sb2S3 and GaAs absorber layer based QDSC is 15.94% and 26.95% respectively indicating GaAs-QD to be a better absorber layer material for a QDSC.

[11]. [*Extending exciton and trion lifetimes in MoSe$_{2}$ with a nanoscale plasmonic cavity*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17879 "Extending exciton and trion lifetimes in MoSe$_{2}$ with a nanoscale plasmonic cavity")
Grace H. Chen, Anchita Addhya, Ian N. Hammock, Philip Kim, Alexander A. High
Excitons in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have extremely short, picosecond-scale lifetimes which hinders exciton thermalization, limits the emergence of collective coherence, and reduces exciton transport in optoelectronic devices. In this work, we explore an all-optical pathway to extend exciton lifetimes by placing MoSe$_2$ in a deep-subwavelength Fabry-Perot silver cavity. The cavity structure is designed to suppress radiative recombination from in-plane optical dipoles, such as bright excitons and trions. We observe a consistent decrease in photoluminescence (PL) linewidths of excitons and trions (~1 nm), along with a corresponding lifetime increase (~10 ps). We confirm the experimental observations arise purely from exciton-cavity interactions-etching back the top silver layer returns the PL linewidth and lifetimes return to their original values. Our study offers a pathway to engineer excited state lifetimes in 2D materials which can be utilized for studies of optically dark excitons and have potential applications for novel optoelectronic devices.

[12]. [*Differential Crosslinking and Contractile Motors Drive Nuclear Chromatin Compaction*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17883 "Differential Crosslinking and Contractile Motors Drive Nuclear Chromatin Compaction")
Ligesh Theeyancheri, Edward J. Banigan, J. M. Schwarz
During interphase, a typical cell nucleus features spatial compartmentalization of transcriptionally active euchromatin and repressed heterochromatin domains. In conventional nuclear organization, euchromatin predominantly occupies the nuclear interior, while heterochromatin, which is approximately 50% more dense than euchromatin, is positioned near the nuclear periphery. Peripheral chromatin organization can be further modulated by the nuclear lamina, which is itself a deformable structure. While a number of biophysical mechanisms for compartmentalization within rigid nuclei have been explored, we study a chromatin model consisting of an active, crosslinked polymer tethered to a deformable, polymeric lamina shell. Contractile motors, the deformability of the shell, and the spatial distribution of crosslinks all play pivotal roles in this compartmentalization. We find that a radial crosslink density distribution, even with a small linear differential of higher crosslinking density at the edge of the nucleus, combined with contractile motor activity, drives genomic segregation, in agreement with experimental observations. This arises from contractile motors preferentially drawing crosslinks into their vicinity at the nuclear periphery, forming high-density domains that promote heterochromatin formation. We also find an increased stiffness of nuclear wrinkles given the preferential heterochromatin compaction below the lamina shell, which is consistent with instantaneous nuclear stiffening under applied nanoindentation. We conclude with the potential for experimental validation of our model predictions.

[13]. [*Analysis of Fe and Co binary catalysts in chemical vapor deposition growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17891 "Analysis of Fe and Co binary catalysts in chemical vapor deposition growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes")
Qingmei Hu, Ya Feng, Wanyu Dai, Daisuke Asa, Daniel Hedman, Aina Fito Parera, Yixi Yao, Yongjia Zheng, Kaoru Hisama, Gunjan Auti, Hirofumi Daiguji, Christophe Bichara, Shohei Chiashi, Yan Li, Wim Wenseleers, Dmitry Levshov, Sofie Cambre, Keigo Otsuka, Rong Xiang, Shigeo Maruyama
Metal catalysts play a pivotal role in the growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), with binary metallic catalysts emerging as an efficient SWCNT synthesis strategy. Among these, iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), and their alloys are particularly effective. However, prior studies have predominantly employed Fe--Co alloy catalysts with fixed atomic ratios as well as unchanged chemical vapor deposition (CVD) conditions, leaving the influence of variable Fe--Co compositions and CVD growth parameters on SWCNT synthesis poorly understood. This study focuses on the role of Fe--Co catalyst ratios, with the aim of elucidating the distinct contributions of Fe and Co atoms in the growth of SWCNTs. By systematically exploring a wide range of Fe--Co ratios and growth conditions, we identified Fe$_{0.75}$Co$_{0.25}$ as a highly efficient binary catalyst at 850~$^\circ$C, primarily forming catalyst clusters with diameters of 2.5--6~nm and yielding SWCNTs with diameters ranging from 0.9--1.1~nm. On the other hand, Fe$_{0}$Co$_{1}$ exhibited higher catalytic activity at 600~$^\circ$C, generating smaller catalyst clusters of 1.5--5~nm and producing SWCNTs with reduced diameters of about 0.6--0.9~nm. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analyses reveal that high SWCNT yields correlate with the formation of uniformly sized Fe--Co catalyst particles with surface-segregated Co that optimizes carbon solubility. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations further corroborate these findings, demonstrating that the structure and melting behavior of Fe$_x$Co$_{1-x}$ clusters depend on cluster size and composition.

[14]. [*Unlocking Surfactant Synergies for Fluorine Replacements: A Microfluidic Exploration of Emulsion Stability and Coalescence Dynamics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17894 "Unlocking Surfactant Synergies for Fluorine Replacements: A Microfluidic Exploration of Emulsion Stability and Coalescence Dynamics")
Rana Bachnak, Cari Dutcher
Fluorinated surfactants are widely utilized in various applications, including firefighting foams, coatings, and lubricants. Their wide utility is due to their unique properties, such as their ability to effectively lower surface/interfacial tension. However, the excessive use of fluorinated surfactants has raised environmental and health concerns due to their persistence in the environment and potential toxicity. The need for effective and sustainable surfactant replacements has therefore become critical. Our study investigates alternative surfactants mixtures that have been proposed to replicate the performance of traditional fluorinated surfactants, while minimizing environmental impact. Here, we study the stability of thin aqueous liquid bridges found in water in oil emulsions, with surfactant mixtures shown to provide synergistic fire suppression in fluorine-free fire fighting foams. Binary surfactant-water solutions of TritonX-100, Glucopon 215, Dow 502W were used, in addition to a ternary surfactant-surfactant-water mixtures of Glucopon 215 and Dow502W. Emulsion stability is assessed using a microfluidic device designed to measure the coalescence frequency. Coalescence frequency is measured as a function of total flow rate and surfactant concentration. A non-monotonic trend of coalescence frequency with flow rate is found for all the surfactants used. In addition, a non-dimensional frequency is introduced and is found to decrease with the Capillary number. The coalescence frequency of the surfactant mixture is found to be close to that of Dow502W, suggesting a synergistic behavior between Glucopon215 and Dow502W, even with less of the siloxane surfactant present in the formulation. This behavior highlights the potential for pairing slower hydrocarbon surfactants with faster siloxane surfactants to achieve an effective alternative stabilizing agent for fluorine free formulation.

[15]. [*Correlation effects in one-dimensional metallic quantum wires under various confinements*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17925 "Correlation effects in one-dimensional metallic quantum wires under various confinements")
Vidit Gangwar, Vinod Ashokan, Ankush Girdhar, Klaus Morawetz, N. D. Drummond, K. N. Pathak
Dynamical response theory is used to investigate various transverse confinements on electron correlations in the ground state of a ferromagnetic one-dimensional quantum wire for different wire widths $b$ and density parameters $r_{\rm s}$. Using the first-order random phase approximation (FRPA), which provides the ground state structure beyond the random phase approximation, we compute the structure factor, pair-correlation function, correlation energy, and ground-state energy. The correlation energy depends on the choice of confinement model and hence effective electron-electron interaction. For the ultrathin wire ($b\rightarrow 0$) in the high-density limit, the correlation energy for transverse confinement models $V_1(q)$ (harmonic), $V_2(q)$ (cylindrical), and $V_5(q)$ (harmonic-delta) approaches $\epsilon_{\rm c}(r_{\rm s})= - \pi^2/360 \sim -0.02741$ a.u., which agrees with the exact results in this limit [J. Chem. Phys. 138, 064108 (2013); Phys. Rev. B 101, 075130 (2020)]. For at least these three confinement potentials, the one-dimensional Coulomb potential can be regularized at interparticle distance $x=0$ to yield the same correlation energy. In contrast, $V_3(q)$ (infinite square well), $V_4(q)$ (infinite square-infinite triangular well), and $V_6(q)$ (infinite square-delta well), do not approach the same high-density limit; instead, the correlation energy tends to $\epsilon_{\rm c} \sim -0.03002$ a.u. The ground-state properties obtained from the FRPA are compared with quantum Monte Carlo results. The peak height in the static structure factor at $k=2k_{\rm F}$ depends significantly on the confinement model. These peaks are fitted with a function based on our finite wire-width theory demonstrating good agreement with FRPA.

[16]. [*Computation and Sensitivity Analysis of the Deformation-Gradient Tensor Reconstruction in Dark-Field X-ray Microscopy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17929 "Computation and Sensitivity Analysis of the Deformation-Gradient Tensor Reconstruction in Dark-Field X-ray Microscopy")
Brinthan Kanesalingam, Darshan Chalise, Carsten Detlefs, Leora Dresselhaus-Marais
Spatially resolved strain measurements are crucial to understanding the properties of engineering materials. Although strain measurements utilizing techniques such as transmission electron microscopy and electron backscatter diffraction offer high spatial resolution, they are limited to surface or thin samples. X-ray diffraction methods, including Bragg Coherent Diffraction Imaging and X-ray topography, enable strain measurements deep inside bulk materials but face challenges in simultaneously achieving both high spatial resolution and large field-of-view. Dark-field X-ray Microscopy (DFXM) offers a promising solution with its ability to image bulk crystals at the nanoscale while offering a field-of-view approaching a few hundred $\mu$m. However, an inverse modeling framework to explicitly relate the angular shifts in DFXM to the strain and lattice rotation tensors is lacking. In this paper, we develop such an inverse modeling formalism. Using the oblique diffraction geometry, enabling access to noncoplanar symmetry-equivalent reflections, we demonstrate that the reconstruction of the full deformation gradient tensor ($\mathbf{F^{(g)}}$) is possible. We also develop the computational framework to both forward calculate the anticipated angular shifts and reconstruct the average $\mathbf{F^{(g)}}$ for an individual pixel from DFXM experiments. Finally, utilizing the established formalism and computational framework, we present methods for sensitivity analysis to relate individual components of the rotation or strain tensor to specific angles of DFXM. The developed sensitivity analysis also enables explicit computation of the errors associated with the reconstruction of each component. The formalism, the computational framework, and the sensitivity analysis established in this paper should assist both the interpretation of past DFXM experiments and the design of future DFXM experiments.

[17]. [*Efficient $G_0W_0$ and BSE calculations of heterostructures within an all-electron framework*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17960 "Efficient $G_0W_0$ and BSE calculations of heterostructures within an all-electron framework")
Maximilian Schebek, Ignacio Gonzalez Oliva, Claudia Draxl
The combination of two-dimensional materials into heterostructures offers new opportunities for the design of optoelectronic devices with tunable properties. However, computing electronic and optical properties of such systems using state-of-the-art methodology is challenging due to their large unit cells. This is in particular so for highly-precise all-electron calculations within the framework of many-body perturbation theory, which come with high computational costs. Here, we extend an approach that allows for the efficient calculation of the non-interacting polarizability, previously developed for planewave basis sets, to the (linearized) augmented planewave (L)APW method. This approach is based on an additive ansatz, which computes and superposes the polarizabilities of the individual components in their respective unit cells. We implement this formalism in the $G_0W_0$ module of the exciting code and implement an analogous approach for BSE calculations. This allows the calculation of highly-precise optical spectra at low cost. So-obtained results of the quasi-particle band structure and optical spectra are demonstrated for bilayer WSe$_2$ and pyridine@MoS$_2$ in comparison with exact reference calculations.

[18]. [*Tuning chiral anomaly signature in a Dirac semimetal via fast-ion implantation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17972 "Tuning chiral anomaly signature in a Dirac semimetal via fast-ion implantation")
Manasi Mandal, Eunbi Rha, Abhijatmedhi Chotrattanapituk, Denisse C\'ordova Carrizales, Alexander Lygo, Kevin B. Woller, Mouyang Cheng, Ryotaro Okabe, Guomin Zhu, Kiran Mak, Chu-Liang Fu, Chuhang Liu, Lijun Wu, Yimei Zhu, Susanne Stemmer, Mingda Li
Cd$_3$As$_2$ is a prototypical Dirac semimetal that hosts a chiral anomaly and thereby functions as a platform to test high-energy physics hypotheses and to realize energy efficient applications. Here we use a combination of accelerator-based fast ion implantation and theory-driven planning to enhance the negative longitudinal magnetoresistance (NLMR)--a signature of a chiral anomaly--in Nb-doped Cd$_3$As$_2$ thin films. High-energy ion implantation is commonly used to investigate semiconductors and nuclear materials but is rarely employed to study quantum materials. We use electrical transport and transmission electron microscopy to characterize the NLMR and the crystallinity of Nb-doped Cd$_3$As$_2$ thin films. We find surface-doped Nb-Cd$_3$As$_2$ thin films display a maximum NLMR around $B = 7$ T and bulk-doped Nb-Cd$_3$As$_2$ thin films display a maximum NLMR over $B = 9$ T--all while maintaining crystallinity. This is more than a 100% relative enhancement of the maximum NLMR compared to pristine Cd$_3$As$_2$ thin films ($B = 4$ T). Our work demonstrates the potential of high-energy ion implantation as a practical route to realize chiralitronic functionalities in topological semimetals.

[19]. [*Black-box optimization using factorization and Ising machines*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18003 "Black-box optimization using factorization and Ising machines")
Ryo Tamura, Yuya Seki, Yuki Minamoto, Koki Kitai, Yoshiki Matsuda, Shu Tanaka, Koji Tsuda
Black-box optimization (BBO) is used in materials design, drug discovery, and hyperparameter tuning in machine learning. The world is experiencing several of these problems. In this review, a factorization machine with quantum annealing or with quadratic-optimization annealing (FMQA) algorithm to realize fast computations of BBO using Ising machines (IMs) is discussed. The FMQA algorithm uses a factorization machine (FM) as a surrogate model for BBO. The FM model can be directly transformed into a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization model that can be solved using IMs. This makes it possible to optimize the acquisition function in BBO, which is a difficult task using conventional methods without IMs. Consequently, it has the advantage of handling large BBO problems. To be able to perform BBO with the FMQA algorithm immediately, we introduce the FMQA algorithm along with Python packages to run it. In addition, we review examples of applications of the FMQA algorithm in various fields, including physics, chemistry, materials science, and social sciences. These successful examples include binary and integer optimization problems, as well as more general optimization problems involving graphs, networks, and strings, using a binary variational autoencoder. We believe that BBO using the FMQA algorithm will become a key technology in IMs including quantum annealers.

[20]. [*Compositional Tuning in NaxAlB14 via Diffusion Control*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18008 "Compositional Tuning in NaxAlB14 via Diffusion Control")
Mihiro Hoshino, Suguru Iwasaki, Shigeto Hirai, Yoshihiko Ihara, Tohru Sugahara, Haruhiko Morito, Masaya Fujioka
A uniform Na distribution in NaxAlB14 was achieved using high-pressure diffusion control (HPDC), which promotes Na deintercalation through enhanced diffusion under high pressure, combined with post-annealing. NaxAlB14 with a non-stoichiometric Na composition is thermodynamically metastable, and conventional solid-state reactions with adjusted starting compositions typically result in the formation of stoichiometric NaAlB14 and side products. While HPDC alone typically leads to concentration gradients, intentionally halting the Na removal process before complete extraction, followed by annealing, enabled a uniform composition across the bulk. This allowed structural and electronic properties to be examined over a wide range of Na concentrations. As Na content decreased, electrical conductivity increased, and the optical band gap narrowed. NMR measurements showed an increase in the density of states at the Fermi level, consistent with DFT calculations predicting boron-related in-gap states. Boron vacancies at specific sites were found to generate deep levels near the band gap center, which can explain experimentally observed optical gap reduction. These results demonstrate that diffusion-controlling methods can be effectively applied to synthesize metastable compounds with tunable compositions in covalent frameworks. Furthermore, they provide a foundation for designing functional boride-based materials with adjustable electronic properties by controlling Na extraction and inducing defect formation.

[21]. [*Ultra-clean interface between high k dielectric and 2D MoS2*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18010 "Ultra-clean interface between high k dielectric and 2D MoS2")
Han Yan, Yan Wang, Yang Li, Dibya Phuyal, Lixin Liu, Hailing Guo, Yuzheng Guo, Tien-Lin Lee, Min Hyuk Kim, Hu Young Jeong, Manish Chhowalla
Atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are promising candidates for next-generation transistor channels due to their superior scaling properties. However, the integration of ultra-thin gate dielectrics remains a challenge, as conventional oxides such as SiO2, Al2O3, and HfO2 tend to unintentionally dope 2D TMDs and introduce interfacial defect states, leading to undesirable field-effect transistor (FET) performance and unstable threshold voltages. Here, we demonstrate that zirconium oxide (ZrO2), a high-k dielectric compatible with semiconductor processing, forms an ultra-clean interface with monolayer MoS2. Using soft and hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and density functional theory, we find that ZrO2 does not measurably interact with MoS2, in contrast to significant doping observed for SiO2 and HfO2 substrates. As a result, back-gated monolayer MoS2 FETs fabricated with ZrO2 dielectrics exhibit stable and positive threshold voltages (0.36 plus/minus 0.3 V), low subthreshold swing (75 mV per decade), and high ON currents exceeding 400 microamperes. We further demonstrate p-type WSe2 FETs with ON currents greater than 200 microamperes per micrometer by suppressing electron doping with ZrO2 dielectrics. Atomic-resolution imaging confirms a defect-free ZrO2/MoS2 interface, which enables top-gate FETs with an equivalent oxide thickness of 0.86 nanometers and subthreshold swing of 80 mV per decade. Moreover, the ultraclean ZrO2/MoS2 interface allows for effective threshold voltage modulation in top-gate FETs via gate metal work function engineering. These findings establish ZrO2 as a highly promising, industry-compatible high-k dielectric for scalable 2D TMD-based electronics.

[22]. [*Defect-Assisted Recombination in Semiconductors and Photovoltaic Device Parameters from First Principles*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18011 "Defect-Assisted Recombination in Semiconductors and Photovoltaic Device Parameters from First Principles")
Jiban Kangsabanik, Kristian S. Thygesen
We introduce a method to calculate defect-assisted Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination rates in imperfect semiconductors from first principles. The method accounts for the steady state recombination dynamics under given non-equilibrium conditions (split quasi Fermi levels), by invoking a full solution to the rate equations describing transitions across the band gap via all possible charge states of the defect. Transition rates due to radiative and non-radiative multi-phonon emission processes are calculated from first principles. The method is used to evaluate the effect of selected defects on the photovoltaic device parameters of seven emergent photovoltaic semiconductors. These examples clearly highlight the limitations of commonly employed approximations to the recombination dynamics. Our work advances the description and understanding of defect-induced losses in photovoltaics and provides a basis for developing the important concept of defect tolerant semiconductors and to discover high-performance photovoltaic materials computationally.

[23]. [*Out-of-plane ferroelectricity, magnetoelectric coupling and persistent spin texture in two-dimensional multiferroics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18018 "Out-of-plane ferroelectricity, magnetoelectric coupling and persistent spin texture in two-dimensional multiferroics")
Ying Zhou, Cheng-Ao Ji, Shuai Dong, Xuezeng Lu
Two dimensional multiferroics with out of plane ferroelectricity hold significant promise for miniaturized magnetoelectric spin-orbit transistors, yet systems combining robust ferroelectricity and strong magnetoelectric coupling are exceedingly rare. Here, we demonstrate that epitaxial strain stabilizes out of plane ferroelectricity in exfoliated two dimensional Ruddlesden Popper derivatives. The hybrid improper ferroelectric Pc phase transitions to a competing P21 phase with purely in plane polarization upon switching, accompanied by a 90 degree rotation of weak ferromagnetism. Crucially, the Pc phase exhibits altermagnetism, while P21 displays full Brillouin zone band splitting, with persistent spin textures rotating 90 degree at the phase boundary. This work establishes a pathway to engineer two dimensional multiferroics that integrate vertical polarization, magnetoelectric coupling, and switchable spin textures, key features for next generation spintronic devices.

[24]. [*Multipole order in two-dimensional altermagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18020 "Multipole order in two-dimensional altermagnets")
Tenta Tani, Ulrich Z\"ulicke
We theoretically investigate the magnetic-multipole orders in two-dimensional (2D) altermagnets, focusing on two representative models: a generic minimal three-site model, and a four-site model representative of monolayer FeSe. We construct low-energy effective Hamiltonians for both systems and calculate their respective multipole indicators to characterize the underlying magnetic order. Our analysis reveals an intriguing contrast between the two systems. We find that the generic minimal model exhibits the expected non-zero magnetic-octupole order. In the monolayer-FeSe model, however, the magnetic-octupole order vanishes globally, and a magnetic-hexadecapole order is present instead. The emergence of altermagnetic splitting in the band structure then arises via the interplay with a sublattice-isospin degree of freedom. Our work demonstrates how the classification and comprehensive understanding of 2D altermagnetic materials transcends bulk descriptions.

[25]. [*Nitrogen-vacancy centre formation via local femto-second laser annealing of diamond*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18027 "Nitrogen-vacancy centre formation via local femto-second laser annealing of diamond")
Davin Yue Ming Peng, Alexander J Healey, Rebecca Griffin, Benjamin Cumming, Hiroshi Abe, Takeshi Ohshima, Alastair Stacey, Brant C Gibson, Brett C Johnson, Philipp Reineck
Emerging quantum technologies based on the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre in diamond require carefully engineered material with controlled defect density, optimised NV formation processes, and minimal crystal strain. The choice of NV generation technique plays a crucial role in determining the quality and performance of these centres. In this work, we investigate NV centre formation in nitrogen-doped diamond using femtosecond (fs) laser processing. We systematically examine the effect of laser pulse energy on NV production and quality using photoluminescence and optically detected magnetic resonance measurements. We also probe the role of pre-existing lattice defects formed by electron irradiation and consider defect evolution over extended dwell times. Finally, we are able to identify a regime where the main action of the fs-laser is to diffuse rather than create vacancies. This local annealing capability expands the toolkit for tailored NV production and presents opportunities for fine tuning defect populations.

[26]. [*Anomalous increasing super reflectance in chiral matter*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18056 "Anomalous increasing super reflectance in chiral matter")
Pedro D. S. Silva, Alex Q. Costa, Ronald A. Pereira, Manoel M. Ferreira Jr
Magnetic and anomalous Hall conductivities induce anomalous transport features and novel optical phenomena in chiral systems. Here, we investigate reflection properties on the surface of a medium ruled by axion electrodynamics, which effectively describes optical aspects of Weyl semimetals. We show that these chiral media can manifest anomalous reflectance (R greater than unity) for some frequency windows, depending on the signs of the two involved conductivities. Such a reflectance can increase with the frequency, being always greater than 1 in certain frequency bands. We also examine the complex Kerr angles at normal incidence on the chiral medium. Giant Kerr angle is observed within the absorption window, while the Kerr ellipticity may be used to determine the relative sign of the magnetic conductivity.

[27]. [*Anomalous magnetoresistance in an antiferromagnetic Kagome semimetal heterostructures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18069 "Anomalous magnetoresistance in an antiferromagnetic Kagome semimetal heterostructures")
Xionghua Liu, Qiyuan Feng, Weibin Cui, Hanjie Guo, Yubin Hou, Xiaomin Zhang, Yongcheng Deng, Dong Zhang, Jing Zhang, Qingyou Lu, Kaiyou Wang
Antiferromagnetic Kagome semimetals have attracted tremendous attentions for their potential application in antiferromagnetic topological spintronics. Effectively manipulating Kagome antiferromagnetic states could reveal abundant physical phenomena induced from quantum interactions between topology, spin, and correlation. Here, we achieved tunable spin textures of FeSn thin films via introducing interfacial Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interaction from heavy-metal Pt overlayer. With increasing FeSn thickness, the variable spin textures result in gradual change in Hall resistivity and magnetoresistance. Importantly, an unconventional damped oscillatory-like behavior of magnetoresistance at relatively low magnetic field can be observed in thin FeSn-Pt samples. This oscillatory like magnetoresistance feature was confirmed to be related to the special topological spin textures revealed by magnetic force microscopy measurements. The formation of rich variety of topological spin textures in association with exotic magneto-transport properties in antiferromagnetic Kagome FeSn heterostructures offers new perspectives for understanding the novel emergent phenomena in Kagome antiferromagnets.

[28]. [*Continuous sample space reducing stochastic process*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18086 "Continuous sample space reducing stochastic process")
Rahul Chhimpa, Avinash Chand Yadav\
We propose a simple model for sample space reducing (SSR) stochastic process, where the dynamical variable denoting the size of the state space is continuous. In general, one can view the model as a multiplicative stochastic process, with a constraint that the size of the state space cannot be smaller than a visibility parameter $\epsilon$. We study the survival time statistics that reveal a subtle difference from the discrete version of the process. A straightforward generalization can explain the noisy SSR process, characterized by a tunable parameter $\lambda \in [0, 1]$. We also examine the statistics of the size of the state space that follows a power-law distributed probability $\mathbb{P}_{\epsilon}(z\le \epsilon) \sim z^{-\alpha}$, with a nontrivial value of the exponent as a function of the tunable parameter $\alpha = 1+\lambda$.

[29]. [*Topological Layer-Spin Filter in Screw Dislocation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18089 "Topological Layer-Spin Filter in Screw Dislocation")
Jiaojiao Zhou, Hong Hu, Jiangying Yu, Lin Xu, Shu-guang Cheng, Hua Jiang
While the quantum spin Hall effect leverages two-dimensional topological states to manipulate spin without dissipation, layertonics extends this paradigm to three dimension by enabling control over the layer degree of freedom. Topological materials incorporating screw dislocations exhibit the capability for simultaneous manipulation of both electronic spin and layer degrees of freedom. In this work, the electronic transport properties of a multilayer Kane-Mele model with screw dislocations is studied theoretically. Numerical simulations of a screw dislocation reveal that dissipationless quantum spin Hall edge states propagate not only at the outer boundaries of the structure but also along the screw dislocation itself, working as layer-spin filter. In detail, 1) the spin-up and spin-down carriers starting from the same source layer flow to different drain layers along the topological channels, respectively. 2) The spin of carriers flowing into a given drain layer is determined by the input source layer. Moreover, we found that the transmission coefficient and spin polarization remain robust against Anderson disorder. Under magnetic disorder, spin flip and backscattering occur, suppressing the transmission coefficient while maintaining nearly unchanged spin polarization. Finally, the layer- and spin-resolved transport properties in a device with two screw dislocations are investigated as well. We have developed an innovative methodology to modulate electron transport with simultaneous layer and spin resolution.

[30]. [*Exploring the functional properties of diamond-like quaternary compound Li$_2$ZnGeS$_4$ for potential energy applications: A theoretical approach*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18136 "Exploring the functional properties of diamond-like quaternary compound Li$_2$ZnGeS$_4$ for potential energy applications: A theoretical approach")
Celestine Lalengmawia, Michael T. Nunsanga, Saurav Suman, Zosiamliana Renthlei, Lalruat Sanga, Hani Laltlanmawii, Lalhriat Zuala, Shivraj Gurung, Amel Laref, Dibya Prakash Rai
It is anticipated that wide-bandgap semiconductors (WBGSs) would be useful materials for energy production and storage. A well-synthesized, yet, scarcely explored diamond-like quaternary semiconductor-Li$_2$ZnGeS$_4$ has been considered for this work. Herein, we have employed two well-known functionals GGA and mGGA within a frame-work of density functional theory (DFT). We have explored the electronic, optical, mechanical, and piezo-electromechanical properties. Our results are in qualitative agreement with some of the previously reported data. The structural stabilities have been confirmed using the Born stability criteria and Molecular-dynamic (MD) simulations. Based on our findings, we claim that Li$_2$ZnGeS$_4$ is the most probable candidate for optoelectronics and piezoelectric applications.

[31]. [*Surface Material Dependence in Powder Triboelectric Charging*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18193 "Surface Material Dependence in Powder Triboelectric Charging")
Tom F. O'Hara, Ellen Player, Graham Ackroyd, Peter J. Caine, Karen L. Aplin
Triboelectric charging of granular materials against container walls is a critical yet poorly understood phenomenon affecting many industrial powder handling processes. Charge accumulation can cause material flow disruptions, adhesion issues, and pose serious safety risks, such as providing ignition sources for dust cloud explosions. This study investigates particle-wall charging behaviour for materials with varying size, shape, and electrical resistivity. Aluminium surfaces are used as a reference case, followed by analysis of labradorite, an analogue for volcanic ash, to examine charging interactions with various wall materials. Finally, the triboelectric response of industrially relevant materials used in flexible intermediate bulk containers, including both lined and unlined variants, is assessed. Results show that stainless steel surfaces generate the least charge, while the presence of insulating polyethene liners increases charging significantly. These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of triboelectric charging mechanisms in powder transfer operations and inform safer industrial practice.

[32]. [*Theory of Magnetization Temperature Dependence in Ferrimagnetics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18209 "Theory of Magnetization Temperature Dependence in Ferrimagnetics")
Rostyslav O. Serha, Anna Pomyalov, Andrii V. Chumak, Victor S. L'vov
Recent advancements in spintronics and fundamental physical research have brought increased attention to the rare-earth-based magnetically ordered materials. One of the important properties of these materials is the temperature dependence of the spontaneous magnetization $M(T)$. Recently, a successful framework was proposed for the theoretical description of M(T) across the entire temperature range from zero to the Curie temperature in simple cubic ferromagnetics, EuO and EuS. We extend this approach to compute and analyze $M(T)$ for multi-sublattice collinear ferrimagnetics such as Yttrium Iron Garnet $Y_3Fe_5 O_{12}$. We analyzed and generalized for multi-sublattice collinear ferrimagnetics two well-known approximations describing $M(T)$. The first approach is the Bloch-3/2 law, which describes the suppression of $M(T)$ due to spin-wave excitation, and is valid in the low-temperature limit $T << T_c$. The second one is Weiss's mean-field approximation, which provides a reasonable description of $M(T)$ near $T_c$. Using a single tuning parameter, we combine these two approaches to describe $M(T)$ for any $0<T_c$. The theoretical result for $M(T)$ aligns well with our measurements and the previously available experimental data across the entire temperature range. We also demonstrate that experimental and theoretical dependences $M(T)$ follow the mean-field prediction $\sqrt{T_c - T }$ for almost all temperatures.

[33]. [*Dissipation functions and Brownian oscillators*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18217 "Dissipation functions and Brownian oscillators")
Matteo Colangeli, Lamberto Rondoni, Pasquale Vozza
We develop a general framework for response theory in diffusion processes governed by Fokker-Planck equations, based on the notion of the Dissipation Function. Using the analytically solvable Brownian oscillator model, we derive exact response formulae for both overdamped and underdamped dynamics of harmonically bound Brownian particles. We also demonstrate that for certain observables and under suitable time scaling, the operations of model reduction and response formula extraction commute.

[34]. [*Relaxation Dynamics in Atomic-Molecular Bose Condensates in the Presence of Gaussian Noise*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18265 "Relaxation Dynamics in Atomic-Molecular Bose Condensates in the Presence of Gaussian Noise")
A. Mukherjee, R. Dasgupta
We investigate the dynamics of atomic and molecular bosons weakly coupled via Feshbach detuning in the presence of Gaussian white noise. The time-evolution of the population imbalance between the two species, as well as the coherence of the system are analyzed using a Bloch sphere model. We observe that the system exhibits relaxation of the Bloch vector components towards a stable equilibrium. In the population imbalance dynamics, the relaxation rates predicted by the Bogoliubov Born Green Kirkwood Yvon (BBGKY) hierarchy are found to be smaller than those calculated with a simple the mean field approximation. As for the coherence dynamics, the inclusion of correlations and fluctuations in the system can either increase or decrease the relaxation time, depending on the initial conditions. We attribute the increase in the relaxation time to the emergence of a structured noise, and the subsequent suppression of certain dephasing channels. We also study the impact of correlations and fluctuations on time-averaged quantities like the drift speed, the fringe visibility, the phase entanglement etc., and find the results to be in perfect agreement with the properties of the relaxation dynamics.

[35]. [*Dynamics of Quantum Droplets in a Quasi-one-dimensional Framework: An Analytical Approach*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18266 "Dynamics of Quantum Droplets in a Quasi-one-dimensional Framework: An Analytical Approach")
Akshat Pandey, Ayan Khan
Quantum droplets have been recently observed in dipolar Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) and in BEC mixtures. This forms the motivation for us to explore the dynamics of these droplets. We make use of the Extended Gross-Pitaevski equation which apart from the effective mean field (MF) interaction, also includes a beyond mean field interaction. The competition of these two interactions in the context of droplet formation is explored. Further, the conditions for droplet formation are studied.

[36]. [*Dis-GEN: Disordered crystal structure generation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18275 "Dis-GEN: Disordered crystal structure generation")
Martin Hoffmann Petersen, Ruiming Zhu, Haiwen Dai, Savyasanchi Aggarwal, Nong Wei, Andy Paul Chen, Arghya Bhowmik, Juan Maria Garcia Lastra, Kedar Hippalgaonkar
A wide range of synthesized crystalline inorganic materials exhibit compositional disorder, where multiple atomic species partially occupy the same crystallographic site. As a result, the physical and chemical properties of such materials are dependent on how the atomic species are distributed among the corresponding symmetrical sites, making them exceptionally challenging to model using computational methods. For this reason, existing generative models cannot handle the complexities of disordered inorganic crystals. To address this gap, we introduce Dis-GEN, a generative model based on an empirical equivariant representation, derived from theoretical crystallography methodology. Dis-GEN is capable of generating symmetry-consistent structures that accommodate both compositional disorder and vacancies. The model is uniquely trained on experimental structures from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) - the world's largest database of identified inorganic crystal structures. We demonstrate that Dis-GEN can effectively generate disordered inorganic materials while preserving crystallographic symmetry throughout the generation process. This approach provides a critical check point for the systematic exploration and discovery of disordered functional materials, expanding the scope of generative modeling in materials science.

[37]. [*Unconventional Thermalization of a Localized Chain Interacting with an Ergodic Bath*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18286 "Unconventional Thermalization of a Localized Chain Interacting with an Ergodic Bath")
Konrad Pawlik, Nicolas Laflorencie, Jakub Zakrzewski
The study of many-body localized (MBL) phases intrinsically links spectral properties with eigenstate characteristics: localized systems exhibit Poisson level statistics and area-law entanglement entropy, while ergodic systems display volume-law entanglement and follow random matrix theory predictions, including level repulsion. Here, we introduce the interacting Anderson Quantum Sun model, which significantly deviates from these conventional expectations. In addition to standard localized and ergodic phases, we identify a regime that exhibits volume-law entanglement coexisting with intermediate spectral statistics. We also identify another nonstandard regime marked by Poisson level statistics, sub-volume entanglement growth, and rare-event-dominated correlations, indicative of emerging ergodic instabilities. These results highlight unconventional routes of ergodicity breaking and offer fresh perspectives on how Anderson localization may be destabilized.

[38]. [*Static and dynamic properties of a binary, symmetric mixture of ultrasoft particles in the vicinity of criticality*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18321 "Static and dynamic properties of a binary, symmetric mixture of ultrasoft particles in the vicinity of criticality")
Tanmay Biswas, Gerhard Kahl, Gaurav P. Shrivastav
We investigate the static and the dynamic properties of an binary, equimolar, size-symmetric mixture of ultrasoft particles in the vicinity of the critical point of the system. Based on the generalized exponential potential (GEM) of order four for the particle interaction and using extensive molecular dynamics simulations in the canonical ensemble we investigate the above mentioned properties for various scenarios: we consider several super- and subcritical states, we expose the system to rapid quenches and to external shearing forces. Based on an accurate determination of the phase diagram and of the location of the critical point we study the static structure of the system in terms of particle-based radial distribution functions. As systems of GEM particles are prone to cluster formation we complement these investigations by a detailed analysis of the composition of the clusters and of their spatial correlations for the different scenarios introduced above. Furthermore we analyse the temperature dependence of the diffusivity of the particles and of the shear viscosity of the system. All these data provide a detailed and profound insight into the properties of the system under phase separation conditions and near criticality.

[39]. [*Observation of Kibble-Zurek Behavior across Topological Transitions of a Chern Band in Ultracold Atoms*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18349 "Observation of Kibble-Zurek Behavior across Topological Transitions of a Chern Band in Ultracold Atoms")
Huan Yuan, Chang-Rui Yi, Jia-Yu Guo, Xiang-Can Cheng, Rui-Heng Jiao, Jinyi Zhang, Shuai Chen, Jian-Wei Pan
The Kibble-Zurek (KZ) mechanism renders a theoretical framework for elucidating the formation of topological defects across continuous phase transitions. Nevertheless, it is not immediately clear whether the KZ mechanism applies to topological phase transitions. The direct experimental study for such a topic is hindered by quenching a certain parameter over orders of magnitude in topological materials. Instead, we investigate the KZ behavior across topological transitions of a Chern band in two-dimensional (2D) optical Raman lattices with quantum gases. Defined as the defects, excitation density is reconstructed via measuring the spin wave functions, with which the power-law scaling of total excitation density is extracted and such scaling could be interpreted within the KZ framework. Our work has heralded the commencement of experimentally exploring the KZ mechanism of the topological phase transitions.

[40]. [*Nucleation of magnetic textures in stripe domain bifurcations for reconfigurable domain wall racetracks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18356 "Nucleation of magnetic textures in stripe domain bifurcations for reconfigurable domain wall racetracks")
V. V. Fern\'andez, S. Ferrer, A. Hierro-Rodr\'iguez, M. V\'elez
Within the racetrack memory paradigm, systems exploiting magnetic guiding potentials instead of geometrical ones, allow for enhancing the versatility of the final devices adding magnetic reconfigurable capabilities. Hard/soft magnetic multilayers with stripe domain configurations fulfill these requirements. In these systems, the topology of the generated textures that would act as information carriers, is strongly conditioned by the stripe lattice configuration. Micromagnetic simulations have been used to study the magnetization reversal process in NdCo$_5$/Py reconfigurable racetracks. By using skyrmionic charges and magnetic vorticity lines, the topological transformations controlling the nucleation of vortices, antivortices, Bloch lines and Bloch points has been analyzed. It has been shown that magnetic topological charge exchanges between textures rule the formation of vortex/antivortex pairs with opposite polarities, key for the guided propagation through the stripe pattern.

[41]. [*Dislocation-Driven Nucleation Type Switching Across Repeated Ultrafast Magnetostructural Phase Transition*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18364 "Dislocation-Driven Nucleation Type Switching Across Repeated Ultrafast Magnetostructural Phase Transition")
Jan Hajdu\v{c}ek, Antoine Andrieux, Jon Ander Arregi, Martin Tich\'y, Paolo Cattaneo, Beatrice Ferrari, Fabrizio Carbone, Vojt\v{e}ch Uhl\'i\v{r}, Thomas LaGrange
Controlling magnetic order on ultrafast timescales, driven by spintronic and recording applications, is one of the main directions of current research in magnetism. Despite major advances in understanding the temporal evolution of magnetic order upon its emergence or quenching, experimental demonstration of the local link between microstructure and dynamic nucleation is missing. Here, taking advantage of the high structural and magnetic resolution of in situ transmission electron microscopy, we observe that cumulative laser irradiation significantly alters the nucleation pathway of the first-order antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic phase transition of FeRh thin films, causing the transition to switch from homogeneous to heterogeneous nucleation. This leads to a decrease of 20 K in transition temperature and the emergence of sub-micron magnetic vortices as preferential nucleation motifs. These vortices are pinned in the film by underlying dislocation networks. We observe that the dislocation networks are formed and rearranged upon repeated crossing of the phase transition using femtosecond and picosecond laser pulses. Our results establish a direct link between defect formation, nucleation energetics, and the microscopic morphology of the nucleated ferromagnetic phase, with broad implications for ultrafast stroboscopic experiments and defect-mediated phase transitions in functional materials.

[42]. [*Persistent paramagnons in high-temperature infinite-layer nickelate superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18373 "Persistent paramagnons in high-temperature infinite-layer nickelate superconductors")
Yujie Yan, Ying Chan, Xunyang Hong, S. Lin Er Chow, Zhaoyang Luo, Yuehong Li, Tianren Wang, Yuetong Wu, Izabela Bia{\l}o, Nurul Fitriyah, Saurav Prakash, Xing Gao, King Yau Yip, Qiang Gao, Xiaolin Ren, Jaewon Choi, Ganesha Channagowdra, Jun Okamoto, Xingjiang Zhou, Zhihai Zhu, Liang Si, Mirian Garcia-Fernandez, Ke-Jin Zhou, Hsiao-Yu Huang, Di-Jing Huang, Johan Chang, A. Ariando, Qisi Wang
The recent discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in hole-doped SmNiO$_2$, exhibiting the record-high transition temperature $T_c$ among infinite-layer (IL) nickelates, has opened a new avenue for exploring design principles of superconductivity. Experimentally determining the electronic structure and magnetic interactions in this new system is crucial to elucidating the mechanism behind the enhanced superconductivity. Here, we report a Ni $L$-edge resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) study of superconducting Sm-based IL nickelate thin films Sm$_{1-x-y-z}$Eu$_x$Ca$_y$Sr$_z$NiO$_2$ (SECS). Dispersive paramagnonic excitations are observed in both optimally and overdoped SECS samples, supporting a spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing scenario. However, despite the two-fold enhancement of $T_c$ in the Sm-based nickelates compared to their Pr-based counterparts, the effective exchange coupling strength is reduced by approximately $20\%$. This behavior contrasts with hole-doped cuprates, where magnetic interactions correlate positively with $T_c$, highlighting essential differences in their superconducting mechanisms.

[43]. [*How Soft is Too Soft? Tuning Order and Disorder in Dimeric Core-Soft Colloids with Bond Flexibility*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18377 "How Soft is Too Soft? Tuning Order and Disorder in Dimeric Core-Soft Colloids with Bond Flexibility")
Leandro B. Krott, Davi Felipe Kray Silva, A. de J. R\'ios-Roldan, Victor M. Trejos, J. Antonio Moreno-Razo, Jos\'e Rafael Bordin
We employ molecular dynamics simulations to explore how internal flexibility affects phase transitions in soft-matter systems composed of dimers interacting via a core-softened potential with two characteristic length scales. Monomers are connected by harmonic springs with varying stiffness, allowing us to tune the dimer rigidity from highly flexible to nearly rigid. Flexible dimers reproduce the behavior of monomeric systems, displaying well-defined BCC and HCP crystalline phases separated by a narrow amorphous region. As the bond stiffness increases, this amorphous phase gives way to a coexistence region between BCC and HCP structures. In the rigid limit, amorphous regions reemerge and expand, and high-density systems fail to crystallize completely, instead forming mixed phases with HCP-like and disordered local environments. This transition arises from geometric frustration: rigid dimers are unable to adjust their internal configuration to optimize local packing, thereby suppressing crystallization and promoting amorphization. Our findings reveal that bond flexibility is a key control parameter governing structural organization in core-softened colloidal and molecular systems, offering insights for the design of tunable soft materials.

[44]. [*Oscillator Potts machines: An overdamped Langevin model for low-energy sampling of the standard Potts model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18379 "Oscillator Potts machines: An overdamped Langevin model for low-energy sampling of the standard Potts model")
Yi Cheng, Zongli Lin
The standard Potts model is a fundamental model in statistical physics that generalizes the Ising model. Although Ising machines, as Langevin models, have been widely studied for sampling the Ising model, studies of Langevin models for sampling the standard Potts model are still lacking. In this work, we present a compact and physically realizable Langevin model that serves as a sampler for sampling the low-energy spin configurations of the standard Potts model.

[45]. [*Antiferromagnetic Hall-Memristors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18388 "Antiferromagnetic Hall-Memristors")
Gaspar De la Barrera, Alvaro S. Nunez
Spin-memristors are a class of materials that can store memories through the control of spins, potentially leading to novel technologies that address the constraints of standard silicon electronics, thereby facilitating the advancement of more intelligent and energy-efficient computing systems. In this work, we present a spin-memristor based on antiferromagnetic materials that exhibit Hall-memresistance. Moreover, the nonlinear Edelstein effect acts as both a writer and eraser of memory registers. We provide a generic symmetry-based analysis that supports the viability of the effect. To achieve a concrete realization of these ideas, we focus on CuMnAs, which has been shown to have a controllable nonlinear Hall effect. Our results extend the two-terminal spin-memristor setting, which is customarily the standard type of device in this context, to a four-terminal device.

[46]. [*Quasicrystalline Altermagnetism*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18408 "Quasicrystalline Altermagnetism")
Rui Chen, Bin Zhou, Dong-Hui Xu
Altermagnets are a recently discovered class of magnetic materials that combine a collinear, zero-magnetization spin structure, characteristic of antiferromagnets, with spin-split electronic bands, a hallmark of ferromagnets. This unique behavior arises from the breaking of combined time-reversal and spatial symmetries (such as inversion or lattice translation), which are preserved in conventional antiferromagnets. To date, research has focused on altermagnetic phases in periodic crystals, where the order is linked to specific crystallographic rotation symmetries. In this work, we demonstrate that quasicrystals, which possess rotational symmetries forbidden in periodic lattices, can host exotic altermagnetic orders. Using symmetry analysis and self-consistent mean-field theory, we predict stable $g$-wave and $i$-wave altermagnetism in octagonal and dodecagonal quasicrystals, respectively. These novel phases are characterized by global $C_8T$ and $C_{12}T$ symmetries and manifest as unique anisotropic spin-splittings in their spectral functions and spin conductance, featuring characteristic eight- and twelve-fold nodal structures that serve as unambiguous experimental fingerprints. Our findings establish quasicrystals as a versatile platform for realizing unconventional altermagnetic orders beyond the constraints of crystallographic symmetry.

[47]. [*Efficient $GW$ band structure calculations using Gaussian basis functions and application to atomically thin transition-metal dichalcogenides*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18411 "Efficient $GW$ band structure calculations using Gaussian basis functions and application to atomically thin transition-metal dichalcogenides")
R\'emi Pasquier, Mar\'ia Camarasa-G\'omez, Anna-Sophia Hehn, Daniel Hernang\'omez-P\'erez, Jan Wilhelm
We present a $GW$ space-time algorithm for periodic systems in a Gaussian basis including spin-orbit coupling. We employ lattice summation to compute the irreducible density response and the self-energy, while we employ $k$-point sampling for computing the screened Coulomb interaction. Our algorithm enables accurate and computationally efficient quasiparticle band structure calculations for atomically thin transition-metal dichalcogenides. For monolayer MoS$_\text{2}$, MoSe$_\text{2}$, WS$_\text{2}$, and WSe$_\text{2}$, computed $GW$ band gaps agree on average within 50~meV with plane-wave-based reference calculations. $G_0W_0$ band structures are obtained in less than two days on a laptop (Intel i5, 192 GB RAM) or in less than 30 minutes using 1024 cores. Overall, our work provides an efficient and scalable framework for $GW$ calculations on atomically thin materials.

[48]. [*Quantum Griffiths phase in the kagome Kondo lattice CeRh$_{0.9}$Pd$_{0.1}$Sn*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18422 "Quantum Griffiths phase in the kagome Kondo lattice CeRh$_{0.9}$Pd$_{0.1}$Sn")
Nan Tang, Rajesh Tripathi, Yasuyuki Shimura, Toshiro Takabatake, Devashibhai A. Adroja, Philipp Gegenwart
CeRhSn is a valence fluctuating heavy-fermion metal with a twisted Ce-kagome lattice, displaying zero-field quantum criticality, previously associated with geometrical frustration. The partial substitution of Rh by Pd in CeRh$_{1-x}$Pd$_x$Sn enlarges the unit-cell volume, suppresses valence fluctuations, decreases the Kondo temperature and stabilizes a possible long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) ordered ground state with $T_N=0.8$ K at $x=0.5$. Previous thermodynamic and spectroscopic measurements for $x=0.1$ suggested a quantum critical spin liquid. We report low-temperature dilatometry and magnetization measurements on CeRh$_{0.9}$Pd$_{0.1}$Sn and compare with published low-$T$ specific heat data. The absence of a Gr\"uneisen parameter divergence excludes a conventional quantum criticality scenario. Instead, the weak power-law divergences signal non-Fermi liquid (NFL) behavior, according to a disorder-driven quantum Griffiths phase scenario. At low temperatures, a negative thermal expansion is found in fields above approximately 0.5 T and the NFL scaling breaks down, probably due to the polarization of AFM correlations.

[49]. [*2D ferroelectricity accompanying antiferro-orbital order in semi-metallic WTe$_2$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18438 "2D ferroelectricity accompanying antiferro-orbital order in semi-metallic WTe$_2$")
Fangyuan Gu, Ruoshi Jiang, Wei Ku
The first switchable electric polarization in metals was recently discovered in bilayer and trilayer WTe2. Strangely, despite the tininess of the ordered polarization, the ferroelectricity survives up to 350 K, rendering the mechanism of such ferroelectricity challenging for standard understandings. Here, via a density-functional-based multi-energy-scale analysis of the system's broken symmetries, we identify a weak out-of-plane ferroelectricity accompanying a strong in-plane antiferro-orbital order. This unusual low-energy correlation, which emerges from an antiferroelectric structure formed at much higher energy, naturally explains the above puzzling observation. This result reveals an unprecedented paradigm of electronic ferroelectricity generally applicable to 2D polar metals with ultrafast-switchable polarization ideal for the next-generation non-volatile memory and other devices.

[50]. [*Local Hall Conductivity in Disordered Topological Insulators*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18441 "Local Hall Conductivity in Disordered Topological Insulators")
Zachariah Addison, Nandini Trivedi
We derive the expression for the local Hall conductivity for systems that lack translation symmetry and use it to study the local fluctuations of the Hall signal around disordered patches in magnetic insulators. We find that the regime in parameter space over which the system is a Chern insulating state increases upon inclusion of non-magnetic potential disorder. In addition, the phase space over which the topological Anderson insulator exists can be enhanced by breaking up a single disordered patch into multiple smaller patches with the same total amount of disorder. We expect our results will motivate the next generation of local scanning and local impedance spectroscopy experiments to visualize Hall currents around patches in the bulk of a disordered topological insulator.

[51]. [*Emergent-gravity Hall effect from quantum geometry*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18458 "Emergent-gravity Hall effect from quantum geometry")
Hiroki Yoshida, Takehito Yokoyama
We theoretically propose a Hall effect driven by effective gravitational fields arising from quantum geometry. We develop four mechanisms for this ''emergent-gravity Hall effect" : real-space gravity, momentum-space gravity, gravitional anomalous velocity, and gravitational Lorentz force which are described by the Christoffel symbols in real, momentum, and time spaces. We construct a unified theoretical framework to systematically investigate the effects of emergent gravity in these spaces on transport phenomena based on the semiclassical theory. We demonstrate these effects by model calculations and clarify the conditions under which a finite Hall response can arise. Our findings open a new avenue for exploring gravitational effects in quantum systems.

[52]. [*A note on the dynamics of extended-context disordered kinetic spin models*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18461 "A note on the dynamics of extended-context disordered kinetic spin models")
Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth, Cengiz Pehlevan
Inspired by striking advances in language modeling, there has recently been much interest in developing autogressive sequence models that are amenable to analytical study. In this short note, we consider extensions of simple disordered kinetic glass models from statistical physics. These models have tunable correlations, are easy to sample, and can be solved exactly when the state space dimension is large. In particular, we give an expository derivation of the dynamical mean field theories that describe their asymptotic statistics. We therefore propose that they constitute an interesting set of toy models for autoregressive sequence generation, in which one might study learning dynamics.

[53]. [*Active {\Delta}-learning with universal potentials for global structure optimization*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18485 "Active {\Delta}-learning with universal potentials for global structure optimization")
Joe Pitfield, Mads-Peter Verner Christiansen, Bj{\o}rk Hammer
Universal machine learning interatomic potentials (uMLIPs) have recently been formulated and shown to generalize well. When applied out-of-sample, further data collection for improvement of the uMLIPs may, however, be required. In this work we demonstrate that, whenever the envisaged use of the MLIPs is global optimization, the data acquisition can follow an active learning scheme in which a gradually updated uMLIP directs the finding of new structures, which are subsequently evaluated at the density functional theory (DFT) level. In the scheme, we augment foundation models using a {\Delta}-model based on this new data using local SOAP-descriptors, Gaussian kernels, and a sparse Gaussian Process Regression model. We compare the efficacy of the approach with different global optimization algorithms, Random Structure Search, Basin Hopping, a Bayesian approach with competitive candidates (GOFEE), and a replica exchange formulation (REX). We further compare several foundation models, CHGNet, MACE-MP0, and MACE-MPA. The test systems are silver-sulfur clusters and sulfur-induced surface reconstructions on Ag(111) and Ag(100). Judged by the fidelity of identifying global minima, active learning with GPR-based {\Delta}-models appears to be a robust approach. Judged by the total CPU time spent, the REX approach stands out as being the most efficient.

[54]. [*Modulation of Non-equilibrium Structures of Active Dipolar Particles by an External Field*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18501 "Modulation of Non-equilibrium Structures of Active Dipolar Particles by an External Field")
Baptiste Parage, Sara Jabbari-Farouji
We study the impact of an external alignment field on the structure formation and polarization behavior of low-density dipolar active particles in three dimensions. Performing extensive Brownian dynamics simulations, we characterize the interplay between long-range dipolar interactions, field alignment, and self-propulsion. We find that the competition between activity (favoring bond breaking) and the field's orientational constraint (promoting bond formation) gives rise to a rich variety of self-assembled, actuated structures. At low to intermediate field strengths, disordered fluids composed of active chains and active percolated networks can emerge, whereas strong fields drive the formation of polarized columnar clusters. Counterintuitively, low activity levels significantly extend the range of field strengths over which percolated networks persist. This structural evolution manifests in the polarization response of strongly dipolar systems, which exhibit a transition from super-Langevin to sub-Langevin behavior with increasing activity, as a result of the coupling between structure formation and activity-induced bond breaking.

[55]. [*Deep learning-enabled large-scale analysis of particle geometry-lithiation correlations in battery cathode materials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18530 "Deep learning-enabled large-scale analysis of particle geometry-lithiation correlations in battery cathode materials")
Binbin Lin, Luis J. Carrillo, Xiang-Long Peng, Wan-Xin Chen, David A. Santosb, Sarbajit Banerjeeb, Bai-Xiang Xu
A deep learning model is employed to address the challenging problem of V2O5 nanoparticle segmentation and the correlation between the chemical composition and the geometrical features of lithiated V2O5 nanoparticles as an exemplar of a phase-transforming battery cathode material. First, the deep learning-enabled segmentation model is integrated with the singular value decomposition technique and a spectral database to generate accurate composition and phase maps capturing lithiation heterogeneities as imaged using scanning transmission X-ray microscopy. These phase maps act as the output properties for correlation analysis. Subsequently, the quantitative influences of the geometrical features of nanoparticles such as the particle size (i.e., projected perimeter and area), the aspect ratio, circularity, convexity, and orientation on the lithiation phase maps are revealed. These findings inform strategies to improve lithiation uniformity and reduce stress in phase-transforming lithium battery materials via optimized particle geometry.

[56]. [*Deep Variational Free Energy Calculation of Hydrogen Hugoniot*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18540 "Deep Variational Free Energy Calculation of Hydrogen Hugoniot")
Zihang Li, Hao Xie, Xinyang Dong, Lei Wang
We develop a deep variational free energy framework to compute the equation of state of hydrogen in the warm dense matter region. This method parameterizes the variational density matrix of hydrogen nuclei and electrons at finite temperature using three deep generative models: a normalizing flow model that represents the Boltzmann distribution of the classical nuclei, an autoregressive transformer that models the distribution of electrons in excited states, and a permutational equivariant flow model that constructs backflow coordinates for electrons in Hartree-Fock orbitals. By jointly optimizing the three neural networks to minimize the variational free energy, we obtain the equation of state and related thermodynamic properties of dense hydrogen. We compare our results with other theoretical and experimental results on the deuterium Hugoniot curve, aiming to resolve existing discrepancies. The calculated results provide a valuable benchmark for deuterium in the warm dense matter region.

[57]. [*Symmetry driven spin anisotropic magnetotransport in quantum spin Hall insulator WTe2 1T*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18543 "Symmetry driven spin anisotropic magnetotransport in quantum spin Hall insulator WTe2 1T")
Shrushti Tapar, Bent Weber, Saroj P Dash, 3 Shantanu Mukherjee, Bhaskaran Muralidharan
We present a comprehensive magnetotransport analysis of monolayer 1T WTe2, highlighting the role of nonsymmorphic symmetries in governing edge-state spin behavior. By comparing the electronic transmission in nanoribbons with edges along the crystallographic y and x directions, our analysis reveals a pronounced anisotropy in the magnetic field response. The y-edge ribbon exhibits significant spin splitting of edge-state bands in both energy and momentum space, along with a strong angular dependence of the conductance. The observed magnetotransport response indicates a spin quantization axis that aligns with the out-of-plane spin quantization axis reported in previous experimental studies. In contrast, the x edge ribbon shows negligible spin splitting under magnetic fields, which is attributed to nonsymmorphic symmetries such as glide mirror and screw rotation, that protects degeneracies along the Gamma X direction, even when time-reversal symmetry is broken. The energy-resolved current density and angular transmission analyses confirm that this anisotropy originates from edge states, while bulk states remain largely insensitive to the field orientation. Our results establish direct transport-spectroscopy based evidence of nonsymmorphic-symmetry-protected spin degeneracy in the 1T WTe2, and underscores its promise for spintronic devices that leverage symmetry-protected and directionally selective transport channels.

[58]. [*Large deviations of ionic currents in dilute electrolytes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18556 "Large deviations of ionic currents in dilute electrolytes")
Jafar Farhadi, David T. Limmer
We evaluate the exponentially rare fluctuations of the ionic current for a dilute electrolyte by means of macroscopic fluctuation theory. We consider the fluctuating hydrodynamics of a fluid electrolyte described by a stochastic Poisson-Nernst-Planck equation. We derive the Euler-Lagrange equations that dictate the optimal concentration profiles of ions conditioned on exhibiting a given current, whose form determines the likelihood of that current in the long-time limit. For a symmetric electrolyte under small applied voltages, number density fluctuations are small, and ionic current fluctuations are Gaussian with a variance determined by the Nernst-Einstein conductivity. Under large applied potentials, where number densities vary, the ionic current distribution is generically non-Gaussian. Its structure is constrained thermodynamically by Gallavotti-Cohen symmetry and the thermodynamic uncertainty principle.

[59]. [*Ultrafast coherent magnon spin currents in antiferromagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18563 "Ultrafast coherent magnon spin currents in antiferromagnets")
Torstein Hegstad, Johan H. Mentink
Generating coherent magnon spin currents with the highest frequencies and shortest wavelengths is a key challenge in ultrafast spintronics and magnonics. A promising route is to excite counter-propagating magnon pairs. In antiferromagnets, such pairs can be accessed in the ultrafast regime, where coherent dynamics are dominated by magnons at the edge of the Brillouin zone. However, it has seemed impossible to generate a net spin current from coherent magnon pairs. Here we show that a coherent superposition of multiple magnon-pair modes can produce such a current in parity-time symmetric antiferromagnets. The ultrafast coherent spin currents are excited with linearly polarized light, with the light polarization steering the current direction. Finally, by superposing two orthogonal spin currents, circular spin currents can be generated, which have not been discussed for steady-state currents.

[60]. [*Variational Monte Carlo Optimization of Topological Chiral Superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18582 "Variational Monte Carlo Optimization of Topological Chiral Superconductors")
Minho Luke Kim, Abigail Timmel, Xiao-Gang Wen
We perform the variational Monte Carlo calculation for recently proposed chiral superconducting states driven by strong Coulomb interactions. We compare the resulting energetics of these electronic phases for the electron dispersion relation $E_k = c_2 k^2+c_4 k^4$. Motivated by the recent discovery of chiral superconductivity in rhombohedral graphene systems, we apply our analysis to relevant parameter regimes. We demonstrate that topological chiral superconducting phases (including a spin-unpolarized state) can be energetically favored over the spin-valley polarized Fermi liquid above the density of Wigner crystal phase. Our results show that the preference for chiral superconductivity is strongest when $c_2$ lies between zero and a negative value, corresponding to a system on the verge of forming a hole pocket around $k=0$. This finding suggests that superconductivity can arise from pure repulsive Coulomb interactions in systems with an almost flat band bottom, without relying on the pairing instability of a Fermi surface. This mechanism opens a new pathway to superconductivity beyond the conventional BCS mechanism.

[61]. [*Programmable phase selection between altermagnetic and non-centrosymmetric polymorphs of MnTe on InP via molecular beam epitaxy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18592 "Programmable phase selection between altermagnetic and non-centrosymmetric polymorphs of MnTe on InP via molecular beam epitaxy")
An-Hsi Chen, Parul R. Raghuvanshi, Jacob Cook, Michael Chilcote, Jason Lapano, Alessandro R. Mazza, Qiangsheng Lu, Sangsoo Kim, Yueh-Chun Wu, T. Zac Ward, Benjamin Lawrie, Guang Bian, James Burns, Jonathan D. Poplawsky, Myung-Geun Han, Yimei Zhu, Lucas Lindsay, Hu Miao, Robert G. Moore, Gyula Eres, Valentino R. Cooper, Matthew Brahlek
Phase selecting nearly degenerate crystalline polymorphs during epitaxial growth can be challenging yet is critical to targeting physical properties for specific applications. Here, we establish how phase selectivity of altermagnetic and non-centrosymmetric polymorphs of MnTe with high structural quality and phase purity can be programmed by subtle changes to the surface of lattice-matched InP substrates in molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth. Bulk altermagnetic MnTe is thermodynamically stable in the hexagonal NiAs-structure and is synthesized here on the (111)A surface (In-terminated) of InP, while the non-centrosymmetric, cubic ZnS-structure with wide band gap (> 3eV) is stabilized on the (111)B surface (P-terminated). Here we use electron microscopy, photoemission spectroscopy, and reflection high-energy electron diffraction, which together indicate that the phase selection is triggered at the interface and proceeds along the growing surface. First principles calculations suggest that interfacial termination and strain have a significant effect on the interfacial energy; stabilizing the NiAs polymorph on the In-terminated surface and the ZnS structure on the P-terminated surface. Selectively grown, high-quality films of MnTe polymorphs are key platforms that will enable our understanding of the novel properties of these materials, thereby facilitating their use in new applications ranging from spintronics to microelectronic devices.

[62]. [*Superconductivity from dual-surface carriers in rhombohedral graphene*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18598 "Superconductivity from dual-surface carriers in rhombohedral graphene")
Manish Kumar, Derek Waleffe, Anna Okounkova, Raveel Tejani, Vo Tien Phong, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Cyprian Lewandowski, Joshua Folk, Matthew Yankowitz
Intrinsic rhombohedral graphene hosts an unusual low-energy electronic wavefunction, predominantly localized at its outer crystal faces with negligible presence in the bulk. Increasing the number of graphene layers amplifies the density of states near charge neutrality, greatly enhancing the susceptibility to symmetry-breaking phases. Here, we report superconductivity in rhombohedral graphene arising from an unusual charge-delocalized semimetallic normal state, characterized by coexisting valence- and conduction-band Fermi pockets split to opposite crystal surfaces. In octalayer graphene, the superconductivity appears in five apparently distinct pockets for each sign of an external electric displacement field ($D$). In a moir\'e superlattice sample where heptalayer graphene is aligned on one side to hexagonal boron nitride, two pockets of superconductivity emerge from a single sharp resistive feature. At higher $D$ the same resistive feature additionally induces an $h/e^{2}$-quantized anomalous Hall state at dopings near one electron per moir\'e unit cell. Our findings reveal a novel superconducting regime in multilayer graphene and create opportunities for coupling to nearby topological states.

[63]. [*Topological constraint on crystalline current*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18611 "Topological constraint on crystalline current")
Tomohiro Soejima, Junkai Dong, Ophelia Evelyn Sommer, Daniel E. Parker, Ashvin Vishwanath
How much current does a sliding electron crystal carry? The answer to this simple question has important implications for the dynamic properties of the crystal, such as the frequency of its cyclotron motion, and its phonon spectrum. In this work we introduce a precise definition of a sliding crystal and compute the corresponding current $\mathbf{j}_c$ for topological electron crystals in the presence of magnetic field. Our result is fully non-perturbative, does not rely on Galilean invariance, and applies equally to Wigner crystals and (anomalous) Hall crystals. In terms of the electron density $\rho$ and magnetic flux density $\phi$, we find that $\mathbf{j}_c = e(\rho-C\phi)\mathbf{v}$. Surprisingly, the current receives a contribution from the many-body Chern number $C$ of the crystal. When $\rho = C\phi$, sliding crystals therefore carry zero current. The crystalline current fixes the Lorentz force felt by the sliding crystal and the dispersion of low-energy phonons of such crystals. This gives us a simple counting rule for the number of gapless phonons: if a sliding crystal carries nonzero current in a magnetic field, there is a single gapless mode, while otherwise there are two gapless modes. This result can also be understood from anomaly-matching of emanant discrete translation symmetries -- an idea that is also applicable to the dispersion of skyrmion crystals. Our results lead to novel experimental implications and invite further conceptual developments for electron crystals.

[64]. [*Symmetry Theories, Wigner's Function, Compactification, and Holography*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23887 "Symmetry Theories, Wigner's Function, Compactification, and Holography")
Jonathan J. Heckman, Max H\"ubner, Chitraang Murdia
The global symmetry data of a $D$-dimensional absolute quantum field theory can sometimes be packaged in terms of a $(D+1)$-dimensional bulk system obtained by extending along an interval, with a relative QFT$_D$ at one end and suitable gapped / free boundary conditions at the other end. The partition function of the QFT$_D$ can then be interpreted as a wavefunction depending on background fields. However, in some cases, it is not possible or simply cumbersome to fix an absolute form of the symmetry data. Additionally, it is also of interest to consider entangled and mixed states of relative QFTs as well as entangled and mixed states of gapped / free boundary conditions. We argue that Wigner's quasi-probabilistic function on phase space provides a physical interpretation of the symmetry data in all such situations. We illustrate these considerations in the case of string compactifications and holographic systems.

[65]. [*Improving Multislice Electron Ptychography with a Generative Prior*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17800 "Improving Multislice Electron Ptychography with a Generative Prior")
Christian K. Belardi, Chia-Hao Lee, Yingheng Wang, Justin Lovelace, Kilian Q. Weinberger, David A. Muller, Carla P. Gomes
Multislice electron ptychography (MEP) is an inverse imaging technique that computationally reconstructs the highest-resolution images of atomic crystal structures from diffraction patterns. Available algorithms often solve this inverse problem iteratively but are both time consuming and produce suboptimal solutions due to their ill-posed nature. We develop MEP-Diffusion, a diffusion model trained on a large database of crystal structures specifically for MEP to augment existing iterative solvers. MEP-Diffusion is easily integrated as a generative prior into existing reconstruction methods via Diffusion Posterior Sampling (DPS). We find that this hybrid approach greatly enhances the quality of the reconstructed 3D volumes, achieving a 90.50% improvement in SSIM over existing methods.

[66]. [*Shallow quantum circuit for generating O(1)-entanged approximate state designs*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17871 "Shallow quantum circuit for generating O(1)-entanged approximate state designs")
Wonjun Lee, Minki Hhan, Gil Young Cho, Hyukjoon Kwon
Random quantum states have various applications in quantum information science, including quantum cryptography, quantum simulation, and benchmarking quantum devices. In this work, we discover a new ensemble of quantum states that serve as an $\epsilon$-approximate state $t$-design while possessing extremely low entanglement, magic, and coherence. We show that those resources such quantum states can reach their theoretical lower bounds, $\Omega\left(\log (t/\epsilon)\right)$, which are also proven in this work. This implies that for fixed $t$ and $\epsilon$, those resources do not scale with the system size, i.e., $O(1)$ with respect to the total number of qubits $n$ in the system. Moreover, we explicitly construct an ancilla-free shallow quantum circuit for generating such states. To this end, we develop an algorithm that transforms $k$-qubit approximate state designs into $n$-qubit ones through a sequence of multi-controlled gates, without increasing the support size. The depth of such a quantum circuit is $O\left(t [\log t]^3 \log n \log(1/\epsilon)\right)$, which is the most efficient among existing algorithms without ancilla qubits. A class of shallow quantum circuits proposed in our work offers reduced cost for classical simulation of random quantum states, leading to potential applications in various quantum information processing tasks. As a concrete example for demonstrating utility of our algorithm, we propose classical shadow tomography using an $O(1)$-entangled estimator, which can achieve shorter runtime compared to conventional schemes.

[67]. [*SETOL: A Semi-Empirical Theory of (Deep) Learning*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17912 "SETOL: A Semi-Empirical Theory of (Deep) Learning")
Charles H Martin, Christopher Hinrichs
We present a SemiEmpirical Theory of Learning (SETOL) that explains the remarkable performance of State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) Neural Networks (NNs). We provide a formal explanation of the origin of the fundamental quantities in the phenomenological theory of Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HTSR): the heavy-tailed power-law layer quality metrics, alpha and alpha-hat. In prior work, these metrics have been shown to predict trends in the test accuracies of pretrained SOTA NN models, importantly, without needing access to either testing or training data. Our SETOL uses techniques from statistical mechanics as well as advanced methods from random matrix theory and quantum chemistry. The derivation suggests new mathematical preconditions for ideal learning, including a new metric, ERG, which is equivalent to applying a single step of the Wilson Exact Renormalization Group. We test the assumptions and predictions of SETOL on a simple 3-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP), demonstrating excellent agreement with the key theoretical assumptions. For SOTA NN models, we show how to estimate the individual layer qualities of a trained NN by simply computing the empirical spectral density (ESD) of the layer weight matrices and plugging this ESD into our SETOL formulas. Notably, we examine the performance of the HTSR alpha and the SETOL ERG layer quality metrics, and find that they align remarkably well, both on our MLP and on SOTA NNs.

[68]. [*Qubit encodings for lattices of dipolar planar rotors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17952 "Qubit encodings for lattices of dipolar planar rotors")
Muhammad Shaeer Moeed, James Brown, Alexander Ibrahim, Estevao Vilas Boas De Oliveira, Pierre-Nicholas Roy
Near term quantum devices have recently garnered significant interest as promising candidates for investigating difficult-to-probe regimes in many-body physics. To this end, various qubit encoding schemes targeting second quantized Hamiltonians have been proposed and optimized. In this work, we investigate two qubit representations of the planar rotor lattice Hamiltonian. The first representation is realized by decomposing the rotor Hamiltonian projectors in binary and mapping them to spin-1/2 projectors. The second approach relies on embedding the planar rotor lattice Hilbert space in a larger space and recovering the relevant qubit encoded system as a quotient space projecting down to the physical degrees of freedom. This is typically called the unary mapping and is used for bosonic systems. We establish the veracity of the two encoding approaches using sparse diagonalization on small chains and discuss quantum phase estimation resource requirements to simulate small planar rotor lattices on near-term quantum devices.

[69]. [*Magnetic Memory and Hysteresis from Quantum Transitions: Theory and Experiments on Quantum Annealers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18079 "Magnetic Memory and Hysteresis from Quantum Transitions: Theory and Experiments on Quantum Annealers")
Frank Barrows, Elijah Pelofske, Pratik Sathe, Francesco Caravelli, Cristiano Nisoli
Quantum annealing leverages quantum tunneling for non-local searches, thereby minimizing memory effects that typically arise from metastabilities. Nonetheless, recent work has demonstrated robust hysteresis in large-scale transverse-field Ising systems implemented on D-Wave's analog quantum hardware. The quantum nature of these intriguing results remains to be understood at a deeper level. Here, we present a conceptual framework that explains the observed behavior by combining two-level Landau-Zener transitions via a first-order piecewise-constant propagator with semiclassical domain-wall kinetics. We test this approach experimentally on a quantum annealer, where we observe clear coercivity even in one-dimensional rings with periodic boundary conditions comprising up to 4,906 qubits-regimes where classical hysteresis is forbidden, but quantum hysteresis is not. Our framework reproduces the measured kink densities, hysteresis loop shapes, and longitudinal sweep-rate scaling trends observed in data from three different D-Wave quantum annealers. In particular, it captures striking non-monotonic features and transiently negative susceptibilities, identifying them as genuine quantum memory effects. These results establish programmable quantum annealers as powerful testbeds for exploring memory-endowed non-equilibrium dynamics in quantum many-body systems.

[70]. [*Indirect multiphoton scattering between light and bulk plasmons via ultrafast free electrons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18091 "Indirect multiphoton scattering between light and bulk plasmons via ultrafast free electrons")
Ruoyu Chen, Jun Li, Qiaofei Pan, Dingguo Zheng, Bin Zhang, Ye Tian, Jianqi Li, Huaixin Yang, Yiming Pan
Efficient coupling between light and bulk plasmons (BPs) remains a central challenge because of their inherent mode mismatch, limited penetration depth, and pronounced resonant energy mismatch between visible-range photons and BPs. In this work, we demonstrate that ultrafast free electrons can coherently mediate an interaction between electromagnetic fields and BPs at the nanoscale. An electron pulse emitted from the photocathode of ultrafast transmission electron microscope, functions as a quantum intermediary that is capable of simultaneously interacting with the laser field by multiphoton processes and BPs by perturbative scattering. Electron energy-loss spectroscopy can capture this indirect interaction, the final electron energy distribution encodes both quantum pathways arising from distinct combinations of multiphoton absorption and emission and BP scattering events. Interference among these pathways gives rise to characteristic spectral modulations, directly revealing the exchange of energy and information between photons and BPs via the electron delivery. Our results show that femtosecond-driven, ultrafast electrons provide a viable route to modulate and even control bulk plasmon excitations in a volume, thereby extending beyond the conventional nanoplasmonics schemes on manipulating surface plasmons by light. This indirect light-BP interaction paves the promising way for exploring fundamental light-matter interaction at ultrafast and nanometer scales.

[71]. [*Advancing the hBN Defects Database through Photophysical Characterization of Bulk hBN*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18093 "Advancing the hBN Defects Database through Photophysical Characterization of Bulk hBN")
Chanaprom Cholsuk, Sujin Suwanna, Tobias Vogl
Quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) have gained significant attention due to a wide range of defects that offer high quantum efficiency and single-photon purity at room temperature. Most theoretical studies on hBN defects simulate monolayers, as this is computationally cheaper than calculating bulk structures. However, most experimental studies are carried out on multilayer to bulk hBN, which creates additional possibilities for discrepancies between theory and experiment. In this work, we present an extended database of hBN defects that includes a comprehensive set of bulk hBN defects along with their excited-state photophysical properties. The database features over 120 neutral defects, systematically evaluated across charge states ranging from -2 to 2 (600 defects in total). For each defect, the most stable charge and spin configurations are identified and used to compute the zero-phonon line, photoluminescence spectrum, absorption spectrum, Huang-Rhys (HR) factor, interactive radiative lifetimes, transition dipole moments, and polarization characteristics. Our analysis reveals that the electron-phonon coupling strength is primarily influenced by the presence of vacancies, which tend to induce stronger lattice distortions and broaden phonon sidebands. Additionally, correlation analysis shows that while most properties are independent, the HR factor strongly correlates with the configuration coordinates. All data are publicly available at https://h-bn.info, along with a new application programming interface (API) to facilitate integration with machine learning workflows. This database is therefore designed to bridge the gap between theory and experiment, aid in the reliable identification of quantum emitters, and support the development of machine-learning-driven approaches in quantum materials research.

[72]. [*Hybrid Quantum-Classical Inverse Design of Metasurfaces for Tailored Narrow Band Absorption*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18127 "Hybrid Quantum-Classical Inverse Design of Metasurfaces for Tailored Narrow Band Absorption")
Sreeraj Rajan Warrier, Jayasri Dontabhaktuni
The inverse design of metasurfaces poses a considerable challenge because of the intricate interdependencies that exist between structural characteristics and electromagnetic responses. Traditional optimization methods require significant computational resources and frequently do not produce the most effective solutions. This study presents a hybrid quantum-classical machine learning approach known as Latent Style-based Quantum GAN (LaSt-QGAN). This method integrates a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a Quantum Generative Adversarial Network (QGAN) to enhance the optimization of metasurface designs aimed at achieving narrow-band absorption and unidirectionality. The proposed method results in a reduction of training time by one-third and a decrease in data requirements by 30\% when compared to traditional GAN-based approaches. The produced metasurface designs demonstrate a high fidelity of 95\% in relation to the target absorption spectra. Additionally, the integration of a material look-up table facilitates manufacturability by allowing for the substitution of predicted material properties with viable alternatives, all while preserving performance accuracy. Moreover the model is able to generate Q-factor upto the order of $10^4$, while the training dataset has Q-factor upto the order of $10^3$.

[73]. [*Inverse Design using Physics-Informed Quantum GANs for Tailored Absorption in Dielectric Metasurfaces*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18132 "Inverse Design using Physics-Informed Quantum GANs for Tailored Absorption in Dielectric Metasurfaces")
Sreeraj Rajan Warrier, Jayasri Dontabhaktuni
High Q-factor narrow-band absorption exhibits high spectral selectivity enabling high-sensitive photodetectors, sensors and thermal emitters. All-dielectric metasurfaces are widely regarded as excellent candidates for giving rise to such narrow-band absorption. However, designing metasurfaces with specific functionalities remains a challenging task both experimentally and computationally, which is why inverse design methods are increasingly being explored. Inverse design process is highly complex due to its non-unique solutions and the higher dimensionality of the design space, making it challenging to precisely control the resonance wavelength, linewidth, and absorption intensity. In this paper, we present a novel hybrid methodology that integrates generative adversarial networks (GANs) (both classical and quantum) with physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) for the inverse design of narrow-band absorbing metasurfaces. By introducing a Fano-shaped absorption spectrum equation into the PINN loss function, we enforce physical constraints on the resonance behavior, ensuring outputs that are both spectrally accurate and physically consistent. The study presents a comparison between a conventional GAN + PINN framework and a PINN augmented by a hybrid quantum-classical GAN (QGAN). The findings indicate that the integrated PINN + QGAN model achieves faster convergence, requires 99.5\% fewer training samples, and yields an order of magnitude lower MSE compared to conventional GANs. Remarkably, even though the training dataset only contains metasurfaces with Q-factors on the order of $10^3$, the model is able to generate highly asymmetric metasurface structures with Q-factors exceeding $10^5$. This study presents a novel framework that integrates quantum machine learning with physics-based modeling, providing a promising method for quantum-enhanced inverse design in nanophotonic systems.

[74]. [*Symmetries of the periodic Fredkin chain*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18291 "Symmetries of the periodic Fredkin chain")
Andrei G. Pronko
Fredkin chain is a spin-$1/2$ model with interaction of three nearest neighbors. In the case of periodic boundary conditions the ground state is degenerated and can be described in terms of equivalence classes of the Dyck paths. We introduce two operators commuting with the Hamiltonian, which play the roles of lowering and raising operators when acting at the ground states. These operators generate the $B$- or $C$-type Lie algebras, depending on whether the number of sites $N$ is odd or even, respectively, with rank $n=\lceil N/2\rceil$. The third component of total spin operator can be represented as a sum of the Cartan subalgebra elements and some central element. In the $C$-type Lie algebra case (even number of sites) this representation coincides with a similar formula previously conjectured for spin-$1$ operators, in the context of periodic Motzkin chain.

[75]. [*Two coupled chiral SYK model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18298 "Two coupled chiral SYK model")
Avik Chakraborty, Manavendra Mahato
The chiral SYK model is an 1 + 1 dimensional generalisation of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model with chiral Majorana fermions. The Dyson-Schwinger equation of the model is exactly solvable in the large-N limit, leading to an exact analytic solution of the two-point function valid across all energy scales. We consider two chiral SYK systems coupled by a quadratic interaction that explicitly breaks the scaling and time reversal symmetry. We compute the two-point function analytically by solving the Dyson-Schwinger equations perturbatively when the two systems are weakly coupled. We find that the system does not acquire a mass gap unlike the 0+1 dimensional coupled SYK model. The leading correction to thermal free energy is independent of temperature and the ground state entropy remains the same as the entropy of 2N free chiral Majorana fermions. The coupled model can be realised as a gapless edge theory of 2+1 dimensional gapped topological condensed matter systems that do not preserve scaling and time reversal symmetry.

[76]. [*Synthesis of nanoparticles from carboxymethyl cellulose using one-pot hydrothermal carbonization for Drug Entrapment Studies*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18299 "Synthesis of nanoparticles from carboxymethyl cellulose using one-pot hydrothermal carbonization for Drug Entrapment Studies")
Mohaddeseh Sharifi, S. Hajir Bahrami
Porous nanomaterials have recently attracted a lot of attention due to various properties and potential applications. In this study, carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) were synthesized by the one-pot hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) using carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Urea was used as the nitrogen source for carbonization. The presence of urea in CMC solution for carbonization resulted in CNPsu reduction in the diameter of particles from 4 micrometer to 1 micrometer. Activation process at high temperature for both the above samples resulted in nanoparticles with diameter of 51 nm and 31 nm, respectively. The positive effect of presence urea and its activation generated different functional groups including C-N, N-H, and C -(triple bond)- N with increasing aromatic rings that probably may help entrapment of drugs into them. On the other hand, activation CNPsu (ACNPsu) has the most aromatic rings with the lowest hydroxyl groups with 84.66% carbon and 12.29% oxygen in its structures. ACNPs, and ACNPsu exhibited a type I isotherm indicating microporous materials with a high surface area about 552.9 m2/g and 351.01 m2/g, respectively. The high surface area was characteristic of activated carbons with their high adsorption capacity. Thus, the synthesized materials were characterized using SEM, TEM, DLS, BET, FTIR, HNMR, and TGA techniques. Finally, the encapsulation of clindamycin drug (CD) with positive charge in different types of NPs with negative charge was investigated for drug delivery in biomedical engineering applications.

[77]. [*Non-Robustness of the Zero-Temperature-Limit Gibbs Measures to Perturbations of the Potential*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18325 "Non-Robustness of the Zero-Temperature-Limit Gibbs Measures to Perturbations of the Potential")
L\'eo Gayral, Mathieu Sablik
The robustness of properties of a statistical physics model to slight perturbations in the exact local interactions of the model is a very relevant philosophical question, considering real-life measurements on which we base some models can only ever reach a finite precision. In this article, we will discuss this topic in a formal mathematical setting, and notably exhibit a family of models for which the low-temperature behaviour is highly non-robust.

[78]. [*Probing metric fluctuations with the spin of a particle: a quantum simulation with bimodal optical cavities*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18351 "Probing metric fluctuations with the spin of a particle: a quantum simulation with bimodal optical cavities")
Jiannis K. Pachos, Patricio Salgado-Rebolledo, Martine Schut
Exploring potential empirical manifestations of quantum gravity is a challenging pursuit. In this study, we utilise a lattice representation of a (2+1)D massive gravity toy model interacting with Dirac fermions that can support specific spacetime fluctuations. We focus on the evolution of the fermion's spin due to its coupling to spacetime fluctuations. To monitor their dynamics a minimal model is required that comprises two bosonic modes describing spacetime geometry fluctuations coupled with the spin of the fermion. A possible emulation of this system involves encoding spin degrees of freedom in an atom coupled with a bimodal optical cavity that provides the two bosonic modes. We observe diverse spin evolution patterns based on its interaction with fluctuating spacetime geometry. Our proposal introduces a novel approach for modelling the effect of interactions between quantum gravity and matter that can be probed with current technology.

[79]. [*Observation of period doubling and higher multiplicities in a driven single-spin system*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18387 "Observation of period doubling and higher multiplicities in a driven single-spin system")
Dhruv Deshmukh, Ra\'ul B. Gonz\'alez, Roberto Sailer, Fedor Jelezko, Ressa S. Said, Joachim Ankerhold
One of the prime features of quantum systems strongly driven by external time-periodic fields is the subharmonic response with integer multiples of the drive period $k\, T_d$. Here we demonstrate experimentally based on a careful theoretical analysis period doubling and higher multiplicities ($k=2,\ldots 5$) for one of the most fundamental systems, namely, an individual spin-$1/2$. Realized as a nitrogen vacancy center in diamond, the particular coherence properties under ambient conditions, strong field sensitivity, and optical addressability allow to monitor coherent $k$-tupling oscillations over a broad set of driving parameters in the vicinity of the ideal manifolds. We verify an enhanced sensitivity within this domain which provides new means for improved sensing protocols.

[80]. [*Toda lattice formed in nonequilibrium steady states of SWCNT*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18412 "Toda lattice formed in nonequilibrium steady states of SWCNT")
Heeyuen Koh, Shigeo Maruyama
Toda lattice or FPUT chain-like dynamics have been regarded as the prerequisite condition to explain the length dependency of high thermal conductivity of low-dimensional systems at the nanoscale. In this paper, a hypothetical condition is introduced that establishes a theoretical connection between the thermal conductivity of a nanoscale low-dimensional system in nonequilibrium steady states(NESS) and the canonical motion of the equation in the Toda lattice in equilibrium. The hypothesis relies on a numerically driven coarse grained molecular dynamics system acquired from the trajectory data of nonequilibrium molecular dynamics(NEMD) simulation. It models the macroscopic motion from longitudinal and flexural modulation observed in NEMD as a separate Hamiltonian in CGMD with a perturbation term governed by an overdamping process, which is assumed to be dominant during heat transfer. The Smoluchowski equation for the perturbation, which is derived from the cross correlated states between two degrees of freedom, suggests that the potential energy function induced from NESS is identical to that of Toda Lattice under the specific condition in the partition function for CG particles. The restrictions derived from the model are well confirmed by the data from the numerically driven CG model.

[81]. [*Far-field directionality control of coupled InP nanowire lasers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18416 "Far-field directionality control of coupled InP nanowire lasers")
Lukas R. J\"ager (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Australian National University), Wei Wen Wong (Australian National University), Carsten Ronning (Friedrich Schiller University Jena), Hark Hoe Tan (Australian National University)
Nanowire (NW) lasers hold great promise as compact, coherent on-chip light sources that are crucial for next-generation optical communication and imaging technologies. However, controlling their emission directionality has been hindered by the complexities of lasing mode engineering and fabrication. Here, we demonstrate spatially-engineered far-field emission from vertically emitting InP NW lasers by establishing precise control over the optical coupling between site-selective NWs, without relying on post-epitaxy transfer and alignment processes. Leveraging this process capability, we design and grow NW pairs and triplets that lase in the TE01 waveguide mode. We then demonstrate the ability to modify their far-field emission profiles from the signature doughnut-like emission to a double-lobed emission profile by changing their optical coupling gap, evidenced by closely matching simulation and experimental profiles. Moreover, through numerical simulations, we show further enhancement in the far-field directionality by arranging the NW laser pairs in a periodic array, demonstrating the feasibility of a directional lasing metasurface. Our results provide a foundation for efficient integration of coherent light generation and beam steering in on-chip light sources.

[82]. [*Three-step growth of vapor-deposited ice under mesospheric temperature and water vapor conditions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18477 "Three-step growth of vapor-deposited ice under mesospheric temperature and water vapor conditions")
Reo Sato, Kentaro Noguchi, Hiroyuki Koshida, Atsuki Ishibashi, Tetsuya Hama
Polar mesospheric clouds provide clues to physicochemical processes in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere. However, the heterogeneous nucleation and growth processes of water ice under polar mesospheric conditions are poorly understood, especially at the nanoscale. This study used reflection high energy electron diffraction and infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy to analyze the structure of vapor-deposited ice at polar mesospheric temperature (120 K) under vapor pressure conditions. The ice appeared to grow in three steps during vapor deposition, being amorphous water for the first 15 nm, then cubic ice up to 50 nm, and finally hexagonal ice subsequently. This three step growth suggests that the three observed phases can coexist in polar mesospheric clouds, depending on the thickness of water ice. The finding of the three-step growth also shows that the Ostwald rule of stages can hold for vapor deposited ice at low temperature.

[83]. [*Low-power switching of memristors exhibiting fractional-order dynamics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18487 "Low-power switching of memristors exhibiting fractional-order dynamics")
Nathan Astin, Yuriy V. Pershin
In this conference contribution, we present some initial results on switching memristive devices exhibiting fractional-order behavior using current pulses. In our model, it is assumed that the evolution of a state variable follows a fractional-order differential equation involving a Caputo-type derivative. A study of Joule losses demonstrates that the best switching strategy minimizing these losses depends on the fractional derivative's order and the power exponent in the equation of motion. It is found that when the order of the fractional derivative exceeds half of the power exponent, the best approach is to employ a wide pulse. Conversely, when this condition is not met, Joule losses are minimized by applying a zero current followed by a narrow current pulse of the highest allowable amplitude. These findings are explored further in the context of multi-pulse control. Our research lays the foundation for the advancement of the next generation of energy-efficient neuromorphic computing architectures that more closely mimic their biological counterparts.

[84]. [*Relaxing Direct Ptychography Sampling Requirements via Parallax Imaging Insights*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18610 "Relaxing Direct Ptychography Sampling Requirements via Parallax Imaging Insights")
Georgios Varnavides, Julie Marie Bekkevold, Stephanie M Ribet, Mary C Scott, Lewys Jones, Colin Ophus
Direct ptychography enables the retrieval of information encoded in the phase of an electron wave passing through a thin sample by deconvolving the interference effect of a converged probe with known aberrations. Under the weak phase object approximation, this permits the optimal transfer of information using non-iterative techniques. However, the achievable resolution of the technique is traditionally limited by the probe step size -- setting stringent Nyquist sampling requirements. At the same time, parallax imaging has emerged as a dose-efficient phase-retrieval technique which relaxes sampling requirements and enables scan-upsampling. Here, we formulate parallax imaging as a quadratic approximation to direct ptychography and use this insight to enable upsampling in direct ptychography. We also demonstrate analytical results numerically using simulated and experimental reconstructions.

[85]. [*Diffusion as a Signature of Chaos*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18617 "Diffusion as a Signature of Chaos")
Nachiket Karve, Nathan Rose, David Campbell
While classical chaos is defined via a system's sensitive dependence on its initial conditions (SDIC), this notion does not directly extend to quantum systems. Instead, recent works have established defining both quantum and classical chaos via the sensitivity to adiabatic deformations and measuring this sensitivity using the adiabatic gauge potential (AGP). Building on this formalism, we introduce the ``observable drift" as a probe of chaos in generic, non-Hamiltonian, classical systems. We show that this probe correctly characterizes classical systems that exhibit SDIC as chaotic. Moreover, this characterization is consistent with the measure-theoretic definition of chaos via weak mixing. Thus, we show that these two notions of sensitivity (to changes in initial conditions and to adiabatic deformations) can be probed using the same quantity, and therefore, are equivalent definitions of chaos. Numerical examples are provided via the tent map, the logistic map, and the Chirikov standard map.

[86]. [*Mobile Impurity in a Two-Leg Bosonic Ladder*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03793 "Mobile Impurity in a Two-Leg Bosonic Ladder")
Naushad Ahmad Kamar, Adrian Kantian, Thierry Giamarchi
We study the dynamics of a mobile impurity in a two-leg bosonic ladder. The impurity moves both along and across the legs and interacts with a bath of interacting bosonic particles present in the ladder. We use both analytical (Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid - TLL) and numerical (Density Matrix Renormalization Group - DMRG) methods to compute the Green's function of the impurity. We find that for a small impurity-bath interaction, the bonding mode of the impurity effectively couples only to the gapless mode of the bath while the anti-bonding mode of the impurity couples to both gapped and gapless mode of the bath. We compute the time dependence of the Green's function of the impurity, for impurity created either in the anti-bonding or bonding mode with a given momentum. The later case leads to a decay as a power-law below a critical momentum and exponential above, while the former case always decays exponentially. We compare the DMRG results with analytical results using the linked cluster expansion and find a good agreement. In addition we use DMRG to extract the lifetime of the quasi-particle, when the Green's function decays exponentially. We also treat the case of an infinite bath-impurity coupling for which both the bonding and antibonding modes are systematically affected. For this case the impurity Green's function in the bonding mode decays as a power-law at zero momentum.The corresponding exponent increases with increasing transverse-tunneling of the impurity. We compare our results with the other impurity problems for which the motion of either the impurity or the bath is limited to a single chain. Finally we comments on the consequences of our findings for experiments with the ultracold gasses.

[87]. [*Optimal chirality enhances long-range fluctuation-induced interactions in active fluids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08973 "Optimal chirality enhances long-range fluctuation-induced interactions in active fluids")
Hashem Fatemi, Hamidreza Khalilian, Jalal Sarabadani, M. Reza Shaebani
Understanding interactions between chiral active particles -- self-propelling and self-rotating entities -- is crucial for uncovering how chiral active matter self-organizes into dynamic structures. Although fluctuation-induced forces in nonequilibrium active systems can drive structure formation, the role of chirality remains largely unexplored. We investigate effective fluctuation-induced forces between intruders immersed in chiral active fluids and reveal that the impact of chirality depends sensitively on particle shape. For circular particles, increasing the self-rotation to self-propulsion ratio suppresses the interaction, reflecting a transition from rotating flocks to localized spinners. Contrarily, a striking collective behavior emerges for rodlike particles: vortices spontaneously form around the intruders, most pronounced at an optimal chiral angle where the mean curvature of particle trajectories matches the intruder boundary curvature, maximizing the effective force. We map the attractive and repulsive force regimes across chirality, propulsion, and intruder separation, offering new insights and principles for designing and controlling self-assembled active systems.

[88]. [*Pauli spin blockade at room temperature in double-quantum-dot tunneling through individual deep dopants in silicon*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10881 "Pauli spin blockade at room temperature in double-quantum-dot tunneling through individual deep dopants in silicon")
Yoshisuke Ban, Kimihiko Kato, Shota Iizuka, Hiroshi Oka, Shigenori Murakami, Koji Ishibashi, Satoshi Moriyama, Takahiro Mori, Keiji Ono
Pauli spin blockade (PSB) is a spin-dependent charge transport process that typically appears in double quantum dot (QD) devices and is employed in fundamental research on single spins in nanostructures to read out semiconductor qubits. The operating temperature of PSB is limited by that of the QDs and remains below 10 K, limiting wide application development. Herein, we confirm that a single deep dopant in the channel of a silicon field effect transistor functions as a room-temperature QD; consequently, transport through two different deep dopants exhibits PSB up to room temperature. The characteristic magnetoconductance provides a means to identify PSB and enables the PSB device to function as a magnetic sensor with a sensitivity below geomagnetic field. Lifting in PSB caused by magnetic resonance (50 K) and Rabi oscillations (10 K) are also observed. Further development of this unique system may lead to room-temperature quantum technologies based on silicon technology.

[89]. [*Simplified approach to estimate Lorenz number using experimental Seebeck coefficient for non parabolic band*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00141 "Simplified approach to estimate Lorenz number using experimental Seebeck coefficient for non parabolic band")
Ankit Kumar
Reduction of lattice thermal conductivity ($\kappa_L$) is one of the most effective ways of improving thermoelectric properties. However extraction of $\kappa_L$ from the total measured thermal conductivity can be misleading if Lorenz ($L$) number is not estimated correctly. The $\kappa_L$ is obtained using Wiedemann-Franz law which estimates electronic part of thermal conductivity $\kappa_e$ = $L$$\sigma$T where, $\sigma$ and T are electrical conductivity and temperature. The $\kappa_L$ is then estimated as $\kappa_L$ = $\kappa_T$ - $L$$\sigma$T. For the metallic system the Lorenz number has universal value of 2.44 $\times$ 10$^{-8}$ W$\Omega$K$^{-2}$ (degenerate limit), but for no-degenerate semiconductors, the value can deviate significantly for acoustic phonon scattering, the most common scattering mechanism for thermoelectric above room temperatures. Up till now, $L$ is estimated by solving a series of equation derived form Boltzmann transport equations. For the single parabolic band (SPB) an equation was proposed to estimate $L$ directly from the experimental Seebeck coefficient. However using SPB model will lead to overestimation of $L$ in case of low band gap semiconductors which result in underestimation of $\kappa_L$ sometimes even negative $\kappa_L$. In this letter we propose a simpler equation to estimate $L$ for a non parabolic band. Experimental Seebeck coefficient, band gap($E_g$), and Temperature ($T$) are the main inputs in the equation which nearly eliminates the need of solving multiple Fermi integrals besides giving accurate values of $L$.

[90]. [*Persistent currents in ultracold gases*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17318 "Persistent currents in ultracold gases")
Juan Polo, Wayne Jordan Chetcuti, Tobias Haug, Anna Minguzzi, Kevin Wright, Luigi Amico
Persistent currents flowing in spatially closed tracks define one of the most iconic concepts in mesoscopic physics. They have been studied in solid-state platforms such as superfluids, superconductors and metals. Cold atoms trapped in magneto-optical toroidal circuits and driven by suitable artificial gauge fields allow us to study persistent currents with unprecedented control and flexibility of the system's physical conditions. Here, we review persistent currents of ultracold matter. Capitalizing on the remarkable progress in driving different atomic species to quantum degeneracy, persistent currents of single or multicomponent bosons/fermions, and their mixtures can be addressed within the present experimental know-how. This way, fundamental concepts of quantum science and many-body physics, like macroscopic quantum coherence, solitons, vortex dynamics, fermionic pairing and BEC-BCS crossover can be studied from a novel perspective. Finally, we discuss how persistent currents can form the basis of new technological applications like matter-wave gyroscopes and interferometers.

[91]. [*Quasi-1D Coulomb drag in the nonlinear regime*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17569 "Quasi-1D Coulomb drag in the nonlinear regime")
Mingyang Zheng, Rebika Makaju, Rasul Gazizulin, Alex Levchenko, Sadhvikas J. Addamane, Dominique Laroche
One-dimensional Coulomb drag has been an essential tool to probe the physics of interacting Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids. To date, most experimental work has focused on the linear regime while the predictions for Luttinger liquids beyond the linear response theory remain largely untested. In this letter, we report measurements of momentum transfer induced Coulomb drag between vertically-coupled quasi-one-dimensional quantum wires in the nonlinear regime. Measurements were performed at ultra-low temperatures between wires only 15 nm apart. Our results reveal a nonlinear dependence of the drag voltage as a function of the drive current superimposed with an oscillatory contribution, in agreement with theoretical predictions for Coulomb drag between Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids. Additionally, the observed current-voltage ($I$-$V$) characteristics exhibit a nonmonotonic temperature dependence, further corroborating the presence of non-Fermi-liquid behavior in our system. These findings are observed both in the single and in the multiple subband regimes and in the presence of disorder, extending the onset of this behavior beyond the clean single channel Tomonaga-Luttinger regime where the predictions were originally formulated.

[92]. [*Complex Frequency Fingerprint: Basic Concept and Theory*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12577 "Complex Frequency Fingerprint: Basic Concept and Theory")
Juntao Huang, Kun Ding, Jiangping Hu, Zhesen Yang
We introduce the complex frequency fingerprint (CFF), an experimentally accessible method for detecting the complex frequency Green's function (GF). Unlike the real frequency GF, where $\omega$ is real, this complex frequency GF is shown to play a necessary role in both non-Hermitian and quantum many-body systems. For non-Hermitian systems, we will prove that our method detects complex energy spectra, eigenstates, and complex frequency GFs throughout the complex plane, providing necessary identification of the non-Hermitian skin effect. For quantum many-body systems, our method reveals quasiparticle peaks across the complex plane and intuitively illustrates interaction effects. This information is difficult to obtain with real frequency detection. Our method paves the way for exploring exotic phenomena in both non-Hermitian and quantum many-body systems, bridging theory and experiment across diverse physical areas.

[93]. [*Regularizing 3D conformal field theories via anyons on the fuzzy sphere*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15299 "Regularizing 3D conformal field theories via anyons on the fuzzy sphere")
Cristian Voinea, Ruihua Fan, Nicolas Regnault, Zlatko Papi\'c
Recently introduced ''fuzzy sphere'' method has enabled accurate numerical regularizations of certain three-dimensional (3D) conformal field theories (CFTs). The regularization is provided by the non-commutative geometry of the lowest Landau level filled by electrons, such that the charge is trivially gapped due to the Pauli exclusion principle at filling factor $\nu=1$, while the electron spins encode the desired CFT. Successful applications of the fuzzy sphere to paradigmatic CFTs, such as the 3D Ising model, raise an important question: how finely tuned does the underlying electron system need to be? Here, we show that the 3D Ising CFT can also be realized at fractional electron fillings. In such cases, the CFT spectrum is intertwined with the charge-neutral spectrum of the underlying fractional quantum Hall (FQH) state -- a feature that is trivially absent in the previously studied $\nu=1$ case. Remarkably, we show that the mixing between the CFT spectrum and the FQH spectrum is strongly suppressed within the numerically-accessible system sizes. Moreover, we demonstrate that the CFT critical point is unaffected by the exchange statistics of the particles and by the nature of topological order in the charge sector. Our results set the stage for the fuzzy-sphere exploration of conformal critical points between topologically-ordered states.

[94]. [*Effective theory for strongly attractive one-dimensional fermions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05915 "Effective theory for strongly attractive one-dimensional fermions")
Timothy G. Backert, Fabian Brauneis, Matija \v{C}ufar, Joachim Brand, Hans-Werner Hammer, Artem G. Volosniev
We study a one-dimensional system of two-component fermions in the limit of strong attractive particle-particle interactions. First, we analyze scattering in the corresponding few-body problem, which is analytically solvable via Bethe ansatz. This allows us to engineer effective interactions between the system's effective degrees of freedom: fermions and bosonic dimers (tightly bound pairs of fermions). We argue that, although these interactions are strong, the resulting effective problem can be mapped onto a weakly interacting one, paving the way for the use of perturbation theory. This finding simplifies studies of many-fermion systems under confinement that are beyond reach of state-of-the-art numerical methods. We illustrate this statement by considering an impurity atom in a Fermi gas.

[95]. [*Phononic frictional losses of a particle crossing a crystal: linear-response theory*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.08239 "Phononic frictional losses of a particle crossing a crystal: linear-response theory")
Gabriele Riva, Giacomo Piscia, Nicolas Trojani, Giuseppe E. Santoro, Erio Tosatti, Nicola Manini
We address weak-coupling frictional sliding with phononic dissipation by means of analytic many-body techniques.
  Our model consists of a particle (the "slider") moving through a two- or three-dimensional crystal and interacting weakly with its atoms, and therefore exciting phonons.
  By means of linear-response theory we obtain explicit expressions for the friction force slowing down the slider as a function of its speed, and compare them to the friction obtained by simulations, demonstrating a remarkable accord.

[96]. [*Strain-Tunable Topological Phase Transitions in Line- and Split-Graph Flat-Band Lattices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11783 "Strain-Tunable Topological Phase Transitions in Line- and Split-Graph Flat-Band Lattices")
Shivam Sharma, Amartya S. Banerjee
In recent years, materials with topological flat bands have attracted significant attention due to their association with extraordinary transport properties and strongly correlated electrons. Yet, generic principles linking lattice architecture, strain, and band topology remain scarce. Here, using a unified graph-theoretic framework we generate entire families of two-dimensional lattices and, using analytical tight-binding calculations, demonstrate that a single mechanical knob -- uniform in-plane strain -- drives universal transitions between trivial insulating, Dirac semimetal, and quantum spin-Hall phases across all lattices. The framework yields several flat band lattices that were hitherto absent or largely unexplored in the literature -- for example, the checkerboard split-graph and triangular-Kagome lattices -- whose strain-driven topological phase diagrams we establish here for the first time. The design rules implied by our studies provide a blueprint for engineering topological states in a wide variety of 2D materials, photonic crystals, and circuit lattices, and are anticipated to accelerate the discovery of strain-programmable quantum matter.

[97]. [*Dimensional crossover and emergence of novel phases in puckered PdSe$_2$ under pressure*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13057 "Dimensional crossover and emergence of novel phases in puckered PdSe$_2$ under pressure")
Tanima Kundu, Soumik Das, Koushik Dey, Boby Joseph, Chumki Nayak, Mainak Palit, Sanjoy Kr Mahatha, Kapildeb Dolui, Subhadeep Datta
We investigate the pressure-driven structural and electronic evolution of PdSe\(_2\) using powder X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and first-principles calculations. Beyond 2.3 GPa, suppression of the Jahn-Teller distortion induces in-plane lattice expansion and metallization. Around 4.8 GPa, the interlayer \(d_{z^2}-\pi^*\) orbital hybridization drives the dimensional crossover, facilitating the transformation from the 2D distorted to a 3D undistorted pyrite phase. At $\sim$ 9 GPa, a novel phase emerges, characterized by octahedral distortions in the $d$ orbitals of Pd. Structural analysis suggests the presence of marcasite (\(Pnnm\)) or arsenopyrite (\(P2_1/c\)) phase with orthorhombic and monoclinic configurations, respectively. Furthermore, the observed phonon anomaly and electronic structure modifications, including the emergence of flat bands in the high-pressure phases, elucidate the fundamental mechanisms underlying the previously reported exotic superconductivity with an enhanced critical temperature. These results highlight the pivotal role of dimensional crossover and structural transitions in tuning the electronic properties of puckered materials, providing pathways for novel functionalities.

[98]. [*Phase transition in quasi-flat band superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17314 "Phase transition in quasi-flat band superconductors")
A. A. Zyuzin, A. Yu. Zyuzin
We investigate superconductivity in a two-dimensional material described by a two-band heavy-fermion model, where hybridization between a dispersive band and a flat band introduces a quasi-flat dispersion to the otherwise localized flat-band electrons. The enhanced density of states in the quasi-flat band raises the crossover temperature for an inhomogeneous preformed Cooper pair state. The superconducting phase stiffness and the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature are governed by the Fermi surface contribution induced by hybridization. We compute the crossover and BKT temperatures, revealing a dome-like dependence on doping. When the pairing amplitude exceeds the energy width of the quasi-flat band, superconductivity is suppressed, and the inhomogeneous pairing regime expands linearly with increasing interaction strength. However, in the opposite case, the BKT temperature reaches a maximum value that is only numerically less than the energy width of the quasi-flat band. We also discuss our results in the context of superconductivity in graphene-based systems.

[99]. [*Crystal tensor properties of magnetic materials with and without spin-orbit coupling. Application of spin point groups as approximate symmetries*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03934 "Crystal tensor properties of magnetic materials with and without spin-orbit coupling. Application of spin point groups as approximate symmetries")
Jesus Etxebarria, J. Manuel Perez-Mato, Emre S. Tasci, Luis Elcoro
Spin space groups, formed by operations where the rotation of the spins is independent of the accompanying operation acting on the crystal structure, are appropriate groups to describe the symmetry of magnetic structures with null spin-orbit coupling. Their corresponding spin point groups are the symmetry groups to be considered for deriving the symmetry constraints on the form of the crystal tensor properties of such idealized structures. These groups can also be taken as approximate symmetries (with some restrictions) of real magnetic structures, where spin-orbit and magnetic anisotropy are however present. Here we formalize the invariance transformation properties that must satisfy the most important crystal tensors under a spin point group. This is done using modified Jahn symbols, which generalize those applicable to ordinary magnetic point groups [Gallego et al., Acta Cryst. (2019) A75, 438-447]. The analysis includes not only equilibrium tensors, but also transport, optical and non-linear optical susceptibility tensors. The constraints imposed by spin collinearity and coplanarity within the spin group formalism on a series of representative tensors are discussed and compiled. As illustrative examples, the defined tensor invariance equations have been applied to some known magnetic structures, showing the differences of the symmetry-adapted form of some relevant tensors, when considered under the constraints of its spin point group or its magnetic point group. This comparison, with the spin point group implying additional constraints in the tensor form, can allow one to distinguish those magnetic-related properties that can be solely attributed to spin-orbit coupling from those that are expected even when spin-orbit coupling is negligible.

[100]. [*Form and function in biological filaments: A physicist's review*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12731 "Form and function in biological filaments: A physicist's review")
Jan Cammann, Hannah Laeverenz-Schlogelhofer, Kirsty Y. Wan, Marco G. Mazza
Nature uses elongated shapes and filaments to build stable structures, generate motion, and allow complex geometric interactions. In this Review, we examine the role of biological filaments across different length scales. From the molecular scale, where cytoskeletal filaments provides a robust but dynamic cellular scaffolding, over the scale of cellular appendages like cilia and flagella, to the scale of filamentous microorganisms like cyanobacteria, among the most successful genera on Earth, and even to the scale of elongated animals like worms and snakes, whose motility modes inspire robotic analogues. We highlight the general mechanisms that couple form and function. We discuss physical principles and models, such as classical elasticity and the non-reciprocity of active matter, that can be used to trace unifying themes linking these systems across about nine orders of magnitude in length.

[101]. [*Finite-temperature quantum topological order in three dimensions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02928 "Finite-temperature quantum topological order in three dimensions")
Shu-Tong Zhou, Meng Cheng, Tibor Rakovszky, Curt von Keyserlingk, Tyler D. Ellison
We identify a three-dimensional system that exhibits long-range entanglement at sufficiently small but nonzero temperature--it therefore constitutes a quantum topological order at finite temperature. The model of interest is known as the fermionic toric code, a variant of the usual 3D toric code, which admits emergent fermionic point-like excitations. The fermionic toric code, importantly, possesses an anomalous 2-form symmetry, associated with the space-like Wilson loops of the fermionic excitations. We argue that it is this symmetry that imbues low-temperature thermal states with a novel topological order and long-range entanglement. Based on the current classification of three-dimensional topological orders, we expect that the low-temperature thermal states of the fermionic toric code belong to an equilibrium phase of matter that only exists at nonzero temperatures. We conjecture that further examples of topological orders at nonzero temperatures are given by discrete gauge theories with anomalous 2-form symmetries. Our work therefore opens the door to studying quantum topological order at nonzero temperature in physically realistic dimensions.

[102]. [*Sampling the space of solutions of an artificial neural network*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08266 "Sampling the space of solutions of an artificial neural network")
Alessandro Zambon, Enrico M. Malatesta, Guido Tiana, Riccardo Zecchina
The weight space of an artificial neural network can be systematically explored using tools from statistical mechanics. We employ a combination of a hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm which performs long exploration steps, a ratchet-based algorithm to investigate connectivity paths, and coupled replica models simulations to study subdominant flat regions. Our analysis focuses on one hidden layer networks and spans a range of energy levels and constrained density regimes. Near the interpolation threshold, the low-energy manifold shows a spiky topology. In the overparameterized regime, however, the low-energy manifold becomes entirely flat, forming an extended complex structure that is easy to sample. These numerical results are supported by an analytical study of the training error landscape, and we show numerically that the qualitative features of the loss landscape are robust across different data structures.
  Our study aims to provide new methodological insights for developing scalable methods for large networks.

[103]. [*Towards Markov-State Holography*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.11636 "Towards Markov-State Holography")
Xizhu Zhao, Dmitrii E. Makarov, Alja\v{z} Godec
Experiments, in particular on biological systems, typically probe lower-dimensional observables which are projections of high-dimensional dynamics. In order to infer consistent models capturing the relevant dynamics of the system, it is important to detect and account for the memory in the dynamics. We develop a method to infer the presence of hidden states and transition pathways based on observable transition probabilities conditioned on history sequences for projected (i.e. observed) dynamics of Markov processes. Histograms conditioned on histories reveal information on the transition probabilities of hidden paths locally between any specific pair of observed states. The convergence rate of these histograms towards a stationary distribution provides a local quantification of the duration of memory, which reflects how distinct microscopic paths projecting onto the same observed transition decorrelate in path space. This motivates the notion of "weak Markov order" and provides insight about the hidden topology of microscopic paths in a holography-like fashion. The method can be used to test for the local Markov property of observables. The information extracted is also helpful in inferring relevant hidden transitions which are not captured by a Markov-state model.

[104]. [*Four-terminal Josephson junctions: diode effects, anomalous currents and transverse currents*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19376 "Four-terminal Josephson junctions: diode effects, anomalous currents and transverse currents")
Bijay Kumar Sahoo, Abhiram Soori
We study a multi-terminal Josephson junction consisting of a central spin-orbit-coupled (SOC) region with an in-plane Zeeman field connected to four superconducting terminals. This setup allows for the simultaneous measurement of both longitudinal and transverse Josephson currents in response to a phase bias and provides a platform to probe the planar Hall effect in superconducting transport. We find that the system exhibits anomalous Josephson effect (AJE) and Josephson diode effect (JDE) when the symmetry between opposite momentum modes is broken in SOC region. Specifically, breaking the symmetry between $k_x$ and $-k_x$ results in JDE and AJE in the longitudinal Josephson current, while breaking the symmetry between $k_y$ and $-k_y$ leads to a finite transverse Josephson current that also exhibits JDE and AJE. Transverse Josephson diode effect coefficient attains values as large as $500\%$ for realistic set of parameters. Furthermore, for specific parameter choices, the current-phase relation in the transverse direction supports unidirectional transport, highlighting its potential for superconducting circuit applications. Our setup offers a new route to engineering nonreciprocal superconducting transport.

[105]. [*High Chern numbers and topological flat bands in high-field polarized Kitaev magnets on the star lattice*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.02684 "High Chern numbers and topological flat bands in high-field polarized Kitaev magnets on the star lattice")
Zixuan Zou, Qiang Luo
The geometrically frustrated Kitaev magnets are demonstrated to be fertile playgrounds that allow for the occurrence of exotic phenomena, including topological phases and the thermal Hall effect. Notwithstanding the established consensus that the field-polarized phase in the honeycomb-lattice Kitaev magnet hosts topological magnons exhibiting Chern numbers $C = \pm1$, the nature of magnon excitations in Kitaev magnets on the star lattice, a triangle-decorated honeycomb lattice, has rarely been explored primarily due to its complicated geometry. To this end, we study the band topology of magnons on the star lattice in the presence of a strong out-of-plane magnetic field using linear spin-wave theory. By calculating the Chern numbers of magnon bands, we find that topological phase diagrams are predominantly composed of two distinct topological phases whose Chern numbers are different by a sign in inverse order. Remarkably, each phase is characterized by a high Chern number of either $+2$ or $-2$. In addition, several topological flat bands with large flatness are identified. The two phases are separated by a dozen narrow topological high-Chern-number segments, whose region shrinks as the magnetic field increases and vanishes eventually. We also find that the thermal Hall conductivity approaches zero at certain parameters, and it changes (keeps) its sign when crossing the topological phase-transition points (flat-band points).

[106]. [*Circular currents in a magnetic ring with zero net magnetization in presence of a side-coupled one-dimensional chain*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04487 "Circular currents in a magnetic ring with zero net magnetization in presence of a side-coupled one-dimensional chain")
Sourav Karmakar, Suparna Sarkar, Santanu K. Maiti
We investigate persistent charge and spin currents in a magnetic quantum ring threaded by an Aharonov-Bohm flux, in the presence of a side-coupled one-dimensional non-magnetic chain. The neighboring magnetic moments in the ring are arranged in an antiparallel configuration. In the absence of the chain, the spin circular current vanishes exactly due to the symmetry between the up and down spin sub-Hamiltonians. Modeling the system within a tight-binding framework, we compute the currents using a second-quantized approach. Both charge and spin currents can be selectively tuned by adjusting the ring-chain coupling strength. Temperature plays a crucial role in modulating the currents, and interestingly, we find that they increase significantly with rising temperature--contrary to conventional expectations.

[107]. [*Data-Based Approach to Hyperelastic Membranes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07120 "Data-Based Approach to Hyperelastic Membranes")
Claudia Grabs, Werner Wirges
We study large deformations of hyperelastic membranes using a purely two-dimensional formulation derived from basic balance principles within a modern geometric setting, ensuring a framework that is independent of an underlying three-dimensional formulation. To assess the predictive capabilities of membrane theory, we compare numerical solutions to experimental data from axisymmetric deformations of a silicone rubber film. Five hyperelastic models - Neo-Hookean, Mooney-Rivlin, Gent, Yeoh, and Ogden - are evaluated by fitting their material parameters to our experimental data using TensorFlow. Our results provide a systematic comparison of these models based on their accuracy in capturing observed deformations, establishing a framework for integrating theory, experiment, and data-based parameter identification.

[108]. [*Learning rate matrix and information-thermodynamic trade-off relation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09981 "Learning rate matrix and information-thermodynamic trade-off relation")
Kenshin Matsumoto, Shin-ichi Sasa, Andreas Dechant
Non-equilibrium systems exchange information in addition to energy. In information thermodynamics, the information flow is characterized by the learning rate, which is not invariant under coordinate transformations. To formalize the property of the learning rate under variable transformations, we introduce a learning rate matrix. This matrix has the learning rates as its diagonal elements and characterizes the changes in the learning rates under linear coordinate transformations. The maximal eigenvalue of the symmetric part of the learning rate matrix gives the maximal information flow under orthogonal transformations. Furthermore, we derive a new trade-off relation between the learning rate and the heat dissipation of a subsystem. Finally, we illustrate the results using analytically solvable yet experimentally feasible models.

[109]. [*Spin demons in d-wave altermagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11062 "Spin demons in d-wave altermagnets")
Pieter M. Gunnink, Jairo Sinova, Alexander Mook
Demons are a type of plasmons, which consist of out-of-phase oscillations of electrons in different bands. Here, we show that $d$-wave altermagnets, a recently discovered class of collinear magnetism, naturally realize a spin demon, which consists of out-of-phase movement of the two spin species. The spin demon lives outside of the particle-hole continuum of one of the spin species, and is therefore significantly underdamped, reaching quality factors of $>10$. We show that the spin demon carries a magnetic moment, which inherits the $d$-wave symmetry. Finally, we consider both three and two dimensional $d$-wave altermagnets, and show that spin demons exists in both.

[110]. [*Self-consistent random phase approximation and optimized hybrid functionals for solids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12768 "Self-consistent random phase approximation and optimized hybrid functionals for solids")
Thomas Pitts, Damian Contant, Maria Hellgren
The random phase approximation (RPA) and the $GW$ approximation share the same total energy functional but RPA is defined on a restricted domain of Green's functions determined by a local Kohn-Sham (KS) potential. In this work, we perform self-consistent RPA calculations by optimizing the local KS potential through the optimized effective potential equation. We study a number of solids (C, Si, BN, LiF, MgO, TiO$_2$), and find in all cases a lowering of the total energy with respect to non-self-consistent RPA. We then propose a variational approach to optimize parameter-dependent hybrid functionals based on the minimization of the RPA total energy with respect to the fraction of exact exchange used to generate the input KS orbitals. We show that this scheme leads to hybrid functionals with a KS band structure in close agreement with RPA, and with lattice constants of similar accuracy as within RPA. Finally, we evaluate $G_0W_0$ gaps using RPA and hybrid KS potentials as starting points. Special attention is given to TiO$_2$, which exhibits a strong starting-point dependence.

[111]. [*How to Train an Oscillator Ising Machine using Equilibrium Propagation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02103 "How to Train an Oscillator Ising Machine using Equilibrium Propagation")
Alex Gower
We show that Oscillator Ising Machines (OIMs) are prime candidates for use as neuromorphic machine learning processors with Equilibrium Propagation (EP) based on-chip learning. The inherent energy gradient descent dynamics of OIMs, combined with their standard CMOS implementation using existing fabrication processes, provide a natural substrate for EP learning. Our simulations confirm that OIMs satisfy the gradient-descending update property necessary for a scalable Equilibrium Propagation implementation and achieve $\sim 97.2\pm0.1\%$ test accuracy on MNIST and $\sim 88.0\pm0.1\%$ on Fashion-MNIST without requiring any significant hardware modifications. Importantly, OIMs maintain robust performance under realistic hardware constraints, including 10-bit parameter quantization, 4-bit phase measurement precision, and moderate phase noise that can potentially be beneficial with parameter optimization. These results establish OIMs as a promising platform for fast and energy-efficient neuromorphic computing, potentially enabling energy-based learning algorithms that have been previously constrained by computational limitations.

[112]. [*Low-temperature cotunneling electron transport in photo-switchable molecule-nanoparticle networks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05552 "Low-temperature cotunneling electron transport in photo-switchable molecule-nanoparticle networks")
Yannick Viero, David Gu\'erin, Dominique Vuillaume
We report the temperature-dependent (4.2 - 300 K) electron transport properties (current-voltage) of photo-switchable two-dimensional arrays of gold nanoparticles (10 nm in diameter) functionalized by azobenzene derivatives. Under UV-light irradiation at 4.2 K, the azobenzene moieties are switched from the trans to cis isomers, leading to an increase of the current. In both conformations, at low temperature (< 77 K) and low voltage (< 1 V) the voltage- and temperature-dependent current behaviors show that electron cotunneling is the dominant transport mechanism. The number of cotunneling events Ncot slightly increases from ca. 1. 4 to 1.7 upon trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzenes. The nanoparticle Coulomb charging energy is not significantly modified (ca. 15 meV) by the azobenzene isomerization. This weak increase of Ncot is explained by the modest cis/trans current ratio (< 10) and the limited numbers of nanoparticle-molecule-nanoparticle junctions inserted between the two nanoscale electrodes (< 50 nm apart) connecting the network.

[113]. [*Asymmetric Electronic Band Alignment and Potentially Enhanced Thermoelectric Properties in Phase-Separated Mg2X (X=Si,Ge,Sn) Alloys*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.09693 "Asymmetric Electronic Band Alignment and Potentially Enhanced Thermoelectric Properties in Phase-Separated Mg2X (X=Si,Ge,Sn) Alloys")
Byungki Ryu, Samuel Foster, Eun-Ae Choi, Sungjin Park, Jaywan Chung, Johannes de Boor, Pawel Ziolkowski, Eckhard M\"uller, Seung Zeon Han, SuDong Park, Neophytos Neophytou
The Mg2X (X=Si, Ge, Sn) based alloy is an eco-friendly thermoelectric material for mid-temperature applications. The Mg2Si1-xSnx and Mg2Ge1-xSnx alloys can be phase-separated into Si(Ge)- and Sn-rich phases during material synthesis, leading to a nanocomposite with locally varying electronic band structure. First-principles calculations reveal that the valence band offset is eight-times larger than the conduction band offset at the interface between Si- and Sn-rich phases for x=0.6, showing type-I and asymmetric band alignment (0.092 eV versus 0.013 eV). Using Boltzmann transport theory and thermionic emission calculations, we show that the large valence band energy discontinuity could allow for energy filtering effects to take place that can potentially increase the power factor substantially in the p-type material system if designed appropriately.

[114]. [*The Integral Decimation Method for Quantum Dynamics and Statistical Mechanics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11341 "The Integral Decimation Method for Quantum Dynamics and Statistical Mechanics")
Ryan T. Grimm, Alexander J. Staat, Joel D. Eaves
The solutions to many problems in the mathematical, computational, and physical sciences often involve multidimensional integrals. A direct numerical evaluation of the integral incurs a computational cost that is exponential in the number of dimensions, a phenomenon called the curse of dimensionality. The problem is so substantial that one usually employs sampling methods, like Monte Carlo, to avoid integration altogether. Here, we derive and implement a quantum algorithm to compress a multidimensional integrand into a product of matrix-valued functions - a spectral tensor train - changing the computational complexity of integration from exponential to polynomial. The algorithm compresses the integrand by applying a sequence of quantum gates to an unentangled quantum state, where each term corresponds to a body-ordered term in the potential. Because it allows for the systematic elimination of small contributions to the integral through decimation, we call the method integral decimation. The functions in the spectral basis are analytically differentiable and integrable, and in applications to the partition function, integral decimation numerically factorizes an interacting system into a product of noninteracting ones. We illustrate integral decimation by evaluating the absolute free energy and entropy of a chiral XY model as a continuous function of temperature. We also compute the nonequilibrium time-dependent reduced density matrix of a quantum chain with between two and forty levels, each coupled to colored noise. When other methods provide numerical solutions to these models, they quantitatively agree with integral decimation. When conventional methods become intractable, integral decimation can be a powerful alternative.

[115]. [*Ultrafast optical excitation of magnons in 2D antiferromagnets via spin torque exerted by photocurrent of excitons: Signatures in charge pumping and THz emission*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02793 "Ultrafast optical excitation of magnons in 2D antiferromagnets via spin torque exerted by photocurrent of excitons: Signatures in charge pumping and THz emission")
Jalil Varela-Manjarres, Yafei Ren, Branislav K. Nikolic
Recent experiments observing femtosecond laser pulse (fsLP) exciting magnons in two-dimensional (2D) antiferromagnetic (AF) semiconductors -- such as CrSBr, NiPS$_3$, and MnPS$_3$, or their van der Waals heterostructures -- suggest exciton-mediation of such an effect. However, its microscopic details remain obscure, as resonant coupling of magnons, living in the sub-meV energy range, to excitons, living in the \mbox{$\sim 1$ eV} range, can hardly be operative. Here, we develop a quantum transport theory of this effect, in which time-dependent nonequilibrium Green's functions (TDNEF) for electrons driven by fsLP are coupled self-consistently to the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation describing classical dynamics of localized magnetic moments (LMMs) within 2D AF semiconductors. This theory explains how fsLP, of central frequency above the semiconductor gap, generates a photocurrent that subsequently exerts spin-transfer torque (STT) onto LMMs as a {\em nonequilibrium spintronic mechanism}. The collective motion of LMMs analyzed by windowed Fast Fourier transform (FFT) decodes frequencies of excited magnons, as well as their lifetime governed by {\em nonlocal} damping with the LLG equation due to, explicitly included via TDNEGF, electronic bath. The TDNEGF part of the loop is also used to include excitons via mean-field treatment, utilizing off-diagonal elements of the density matrix, of Coulomb interaction binding conduction-band electrons and valence-band holes. Finally, our theory predicts how excited magnons will {\em pump} time-dependent charge currents into the attached electrodes, or locally within AF semiconductor that will then emit electromagnetic radiation. The windowed FFT of these signals contains imprints of excited magnons, as well as their interaction with excitons, which could be exploited as a novel probe in future experiments.

[116]. [*Excess Observables Reveal Nonreciprocity in Integrated Covariance*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07876 "Excess Observables Reveal Nonreciprocity in Integrated Covariance")
Timur Aslyamov, Massimiliano Esposito
Near equilibrium, the symmetric part of the time-integrated steady-state covariance, i.e., the time integral of correlation functions, is governed by the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, while the antisymmetric part vanishes due to Onsager reciprocity. Far from equilibrium, where these principles no longer apply, we develop a unified formalism for both symmetric and antisymmetric components of integrated covariances. We derive exact, computationally tractable expressions for these quantities, valid in arbitrary nonequilibrium steady states of Markov jump processes. Both components are expressed in terms of excess observables, a notion central to both statistical physics and reinforcement learning. Furthermore, we establish thermodynamic upper bounds for these covariances in terms of entropy production, dynamical activity, and cycle affinities.

[117]. [*Large Interconnected Thermodynamic Systems Nearly Minimize Entropy Production*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.10476 "Large Interconnected Thermodynamic Systems Nearly Minimize Entropy Production")
Kyle J. Ray, Alexander B. Boyd
Many have speculated whether nonequilibrium systems obey principles of maximum or minimum entropy production. In this work, we use stochastic thermodynamics to derive the condition for the minimum entropy production state (MEPS) for continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs), even far from equilibrium. We show that real nonequilibrium steady states (NESS) generally violate both the MINEP and MAXEP principles. However, through numerical sampling of large interconnected CTMCs, we find that as system size increases, the steady-state entropy production tends to converge toward the minimum. This suggests that large nonequilibrium systems may self-organize to make efficient use of thermodynamic resources, offering a nuanced perspective on the longstanding debate between MAXEP and MINEP.

[118]. [*Simphony: A full tight-binding package for lattice vibrations and topological phonon analysis*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.15413 "Simphony: A full tight-binding package for lattice vibrations and topological phonon analysis")
Francesc Ballester, Ion Errea, Maia G. Vergniory
Simphony is an open-source software package designed for the topological analysis of lattice vibrations based on Wannier tight-binding models. Its primary function is to classify the topology of novel materials by computing bulk and slab phonon band structures, extracting phonon surface spectra, and providing analysis tools such as Wilson loop calculations and Weyl node detection. The workflow is analogous to that of established electronic topology codes like Wannier90 and WannierTools. It also incorporates long-range polar interactions during the wannierization process, making Simphony one of the first tools capable of diagnosing topology in polar insulators.

[119]. [*Phonon Dynamics of Topological Quantum Materials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17203 "Phonon Dynamics of Topological Quantum Materials")
Vivek Kumar
The thesis presents a comprehensive Raman spectroscopic and first-principle density functional theory based investigation of V_(1-x)PS_(3) ; PbTaSe_(2) and 1T-TaS_(2). In V_(1-x)PS_(3),the detection of fractionalized excitations (Majorana fermions) suggests a potential Kitaev spin liquid phase, which becomes more pronounced as dimensionality decreases. Evidence of temperature-driven structural phase transition and topological surface phonons has been detected in PbTaSe_(2). TaS_(2) in 1T-phase reveals the presence of a hidden quantum state, a Mott-insulating phase, and a quantum spin liquid state. The observed phenomenon in these quantum systems makes them a promising candidate for advanced technologies such as quantum computing and communication.

[120]. [*Using optical tweezers to simultaneously trap, charge and measure the charge of a microparticle in air*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17591 "Using optical tweezers to simultaneously trap, charge and measure the charge of a microparticle in air")
Andrea Stoellner, Isaac C. D. Lenton, Artem G. Volosniev, James Millen, Renjiro Shibuya, Hisao Ishii, Dmytro Rak, Zhanybek Alpichshev, Gregory David, Ruth Signorell, Caroline Muller, Scott Waitukaitis
Optical tweezers are widely used as a highly sensitive tool to measure forces on micron-scale particles. One such application is the measurement of the electric charge of a particle, which can be done with high precision in liquids, air, or vacuum. We experimentally investigate how the trapping laser itself can electrically charge such a particle, in our case a $\sim 1\,\mathrm{\mu m\;SiO_2}$ sphere in air. We model the charging mechanism as a two-photon process which reproduces the experimental data with high fidelity.

[121]. [*Fine-Tuned Language Models Generate Stable Inorganic Materials as Text*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04379 "Fine-Tuned Language Models Generate Stable Inorganic Materials as Text")
Nate Gruver, Anuroop Sriram, Andrea Madotto, Andrew Gordon Wilson, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Zachary Ulissi
We propose fine-tuning large language models for generation of stable materials. While unorthodox, fine-tuning large language models on text-encoded atomistic data is simple to implement yet reliable, with around 90% of sampled structures obeying physical constraints on atom positions and charges. Using energy above hull calculations from both learned ML potentials and gold-standard DFT calculations, we show that our strongest model (fine-tuned LLaMA-2 70B) can generate materials predicted to be metastable at about twice the rate (49% vs 28%) of CDVAE, a competing diffusion model. Because of text prompting's inherent flexibility, our models can simultaneously be used for unconditional generation of stable material, infilling of partial structures and text-conditional generation. Finally, we show that language models' ability to capture key symmetries of crystal structures improves with model scale, suggesting that the biases of pretrained LLMs are surprisingly well-suited for atomistic data.

[122]. [*The Role of the Time-Dependent Hessian in High-Dimensional Optimization*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02418 "The Role of the Time-Dependent Hessian in High-Dimensional Optimization")
Tony Bonnaire, Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota
Gradient descent is commonly used to find minima in rough landscapes, particularly in recent machine learning applications. However, a theoretical understanding of why good solutions are found remains elusive, especially in strongly non-convex and high-dimensional settings. Here, we focus on the phase retrieval problem as a typical example, which has received a lot of attention recently in theoretical machine learning. We analyze the Hessian during gradient descent, identify a dynamical transition in its spectral properties, and relate it to the ability of escaping rough regions in the loss landscape. When the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is large enough, an informative negative direction exists in the Hessian at the beginning of the descent, i.e in the initial condition. While descending, a BBP transition in the spectrum takes place in finite time: the direction is lost, and the dynamics is trapped in a rugged region filled with marginally stable bad minima. Surprisingly, for finite system sizes, this window of negative curvature allows the system to recover the signal well before the theoretical SNR found for infinite sizes, emphasizing the central role of initialization and early-time dynamics for efficiently navigating rough landscapes.

[123]. [*Superfluid quantum criticality and the thermal evolution of neutron stars*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03931 "Superfluid quantum criticality and the thermal evolution of neutron stars")
Hao-Fu Zhu, Guo-Zhu Liu, Jing-Rong Wang, Xufen Wu
The neutron star starts to cool down shortly after its birth by emitting neutrinos. As it becomes cold enough, the Cooper pairs of neutrons are formed, triggering a superfluid transition. Previous studies on neutron superfluidity are focused on finite-temperature transitions, with little attention paid to the potentially important quantum critical phenomena associated with superfluidity. Here, we provide the first theoretical analysis of superfluid quantum criticality, concentrating on its impact on neutron star cooling. Extensive calculations found that superfluidity occurs within a finite range of neutron star density $\rho$. The density serves as a non-thermal parameter for superfluid quantum phase transition. In a broad quantum critical region, gapless neutrons are strongly coupled to the quantum critical fluctuations of superfluid order parameter. We handle this coupling using both perturbation theory and renormalization group method and find that it leads to non-Fermi liquid behavior, which yields a logarithmic $T\ln(1/T)$ correction to the neutron specific heat $c_{\mathrm{n}}\propto T$ and also dramatically alters the neutrino emissivity. Quantum critical phenomena emerge much earlier than the onset of superfluidity and persist throughout almost the entire lifetime of a neutron star. At low temperatures, these phenomena coexist with superfluidity in the neutron star interior but occupy different layers. We incorporate superfluid quantum criticality into the theoretical description of neutron star cooling and show that it substantially prolongs the thermal relaxation time. By varying the strength of superfluid fluctuations and other quantities, we obtain an excellent fit to the observed cooling data of a number of neutron stars. Our results indicate an intriguing correlation between superfluid quantum criticality and the thermal evolution of neutron stars.

[124]. [*Quasicrystal Scattering and the Riemann Zeta Function*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03673 "Quasicrystal Scattering and the Riemann Zeta Function")
Michael Shaughnessy
I carry out numerical scattering calculations against a family of finite-length one-dimensional point-like arrangements of atoms, $\chi(x)$, related to the distribution of prime numbers by a shift operation making the atomic density approximately constant. I show how the Riemann Zeta Function (RZF) naturally parameterizes the analytic structure of the scattering amplitude and give numerical results.

[125]. [*Gauge fields induced by curved spacetime*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03647 "Gauge fields induced by curved spacetime")
Pasquale Marra
I found an extended duality (triality) between Dirac fermions in periodic spacetime metrics, nonrelativistic fermions in gauge fields (e.g., Harper-Hofstadter model), and in periodic scalar fields on a lattice (e.g., Aubry-Andr\'e model). This indicates an unexpected equivalence between spacetime metrics, gauge fields, and scalar fields on the lattice, which is understood as different physical representations of the same mathematical object, the quantum group $\mathcal{U}_q(\mathfrak{sl}_2)$. This quantum group is generated by the exponentiation of two canonical conjugate operators, namely a linear combination of position and momentum (periodic spacetime metrics), the two components of the gauge invariant momentum (gauge fields), position and momentum (periodic scalar fields). Hence, on a lattice, Dirac fermions in a periodic spacetime metric are equivalent to nonrelativistic fermions in a periodic scalar field after a proper canonical transformation. The three lattice Hamiltonians (periodic spacetime metric, Harper-Hofstadter, and Aubry-Andr\'e) share the same properties, namely fractal phase diagrams, self-similarity, $S$-duality, topological invariants, flat bands, and topologically quantized current in the incommensurate regimes. In essence, this work unveils an unexpected link between gravity and gauge fields, opens new avenues for studying analog gravity, e.g., the Unruh effect and universe expansions/contractions, suggests the existence of an $S$-duality of spacetime curvatures, and hints at novel pathways to quantized gravity theories.

[126]. [*Extracting topological spins from bulk multipartite entanglement*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12259 "Extracting topological spins from bulk multipartite entanglement")
Yarden Sheffer, Ady Stern, Erez Berg
We address the problem of identifying a 2+1d topologically ordered phase using measurements on the ground-state wavefunction. For non-chiral topological order, we describe a series of bulk multipartite entanglement measures that extract the invariants $\sum_a d_a^2 \theta_a^r$ for any $r \geq 2$, where $d_a$ and $\theta_a$ are the quantum dimension and topological spin of an anyon $a$, respectively. These invariants are obtained as expectation values of permutation operators between $2r$ replicas of the wavefunction, applying different permutations on four distinct regions of the plane. Our proposed measures provide a refined tool for distinguishing topological phases, capturing information beyond conventional entanglement measures such as the topological entanglement entropy. We argue that any operator capable of extracting the above invariants must act on at least $2r$ replicas, making our procedure optimal in terms of the required number of replicas. We discuss the generalization of our results to chiral states.

[127]. [*Step-by-step design guide of a cryogenic three-axis vector magnet*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05459 "Step-by-step design guide of a cryogenic three-axis vector magnet")
Gaia Da Prato, Yong Yu, Ronald Bode, Simon Gr\"oblacher
A tunable magnetic field at low temperatures is essential for numerous applications, including spintronics, magnetic resonance imaging, and condensed matter physics. While commercial superconducting vector magnets are available, they are complex, expensive, and often not adaptable to specific experimental needs. As a result, simple in-house designs are often being used in research environments. However, no comprehensive step-by-step guide for their construction currently exists. In this work, we provide a detailed manual for designing and building a cryogenically compatible three-axis vector magnet. The system is tested at the mixing chamber of a dilution refrigerator at temperatures ranging from 15 mK to 4 K, with no significant increase in base temperature. Safety measures are implemented to mitigate heating from quenching. The coils are successfully driven with DC currents as high as 3 A, generating magnetic fields of up to 2.5 T in the bobbin's bore and 0.4 T at the sample position. Magnetic field measurements using Hall sensors demonstrate good agreement with the predictions of the designed performance.

[128]. [*Chemical reasoning in LLMs unlocks strategy-aware synthesis planning and reaction mechanism elucidation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08537 "Chemical reasoning in LLMs unlocks strategy-aware synthesis planning and reaction mechanism elucidation")
Andres M Bran, Theo A Neukomm, Daniel P Armstrong, Zlatko Jon\v{c}ev, Philippe Schwaller
While automated chemical tools excel at specific tasks, they have struggled to capture the strategic thinking that characterizes expert chemical reasoning. Here we demonstrate that large language models (LLMs) can serve as powerful tools enabling chemical analysis. When integrated with traditional search algorithms, they enable a new approach to computer-aided synthesis that mirrors human expert thinking. Rather than using LLMs to directly manipulate chemical structures, we leverage their ability to evaluate chemical strategies and guide search algorithms toward chemically meaningful solutions. We demonstrate this paradigm through two fundamental challenges: strategy-aware retrosynthetic planning and mechanism elucidation. In retrosynthetic planning, our system allows chemists to specify desired synthetic strategies in natural language -- from protecting group strategies to global feasibility assessment -- and uses traditional or LLM-guided Monte Carlo Tree Search to find routes that satisfy these constraints. In mechanism elucidation, LLMs guide the search for plausible reaction mechanisms by combining chemical principles with systematic exploration. This approach shows strong performance across diverse chemical tasks, with newer and larger models demonstrating increasingly sophisticated chemical reasoning. Our approach establishes a new paradigm for computer-aided chemistry that combines the strategic understanding of LLMs with the precision of traditional chemical tools, opening possibilities for more intuitive and powerful chemical automation systems.

[129]. [*Extremal Ising Gibbs States on Lobachevsky lattices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19553 "Extremal Ising Gibbs States on Lobachevsky lattices")
Matteo D'Achille, Loren Coquille, Arnaud Le Ny
We exhibit an uncountable family of extremal inhomogeneous Gibbs measures of the low temperature Ising model on regular tilings of the hyperbolic plane. These states arise as low temperature perturbations of local ground states having a sparse enough set of frustrated edges, the sparseness being measured in terms of the isoperimetric constant of the graph. This result is implied by an extension of the article [5] on regular trees to non-amenable graphs. We moreover argue how we can deduce the extremality of an uncountable subset of the Series--Sinai states [23] at low temperature.

[130]. [*Role of Nonstabilizerness in Quantum Optimization*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17185 "Role of Nonstabilizerness in Quantum Optimization")
Chiara Capecci, Gopal Chandra Santra, Alberto Bottarelli, Emanuele Tirrito, Philipp Hauke
Quantum optimization has emerged as a promising approach for tackling complicated classical optimization problems using quantum devices. However, the extent to which such algorithms harness genuine quantum resources and the role of these resources in their success remain open questions. In this work, we investigate the resource requirements of the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) through the lens of the resource theory of nonstabilizerness. We demonstrate that the nonstabilizerness in QAOA increases with circuit depth before it reaches a maximum, to fall again during the approach to the final solution state -- creating a barrier that limits the algorithm's capability for shallow circuits. We find curves corresponding to different depths to collapse under a simple rescaling, and we reveal a nontrivial relationship between the final nonstabilizerness and the success probability. Finally, we identify a similar nonstabilizerness barrier also in adiabatic quantum annealing. Our results provide deeper insights into how quantum resources influence quantum optimization.

[131]. [*Evidence of Memory Effects in the Dynamics of Two-Level System Defect Ensembles Using Broadband, Cryogenic Transient Dielectric Spectroscopy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18263 "Evidence of Memory Effects in the Dynamics of Two-Level System Defect Ensembles Using Broadband, Cryogenic Transient Dielectric Spectroscopy")
Qianxu Wang, Sara Magdalena G\'omez, Juan S. Salcedo-Gallo, Roy Leibovitz, Jake Freeman, Salil Bedkihal, Mattias Fitzpatrick
Two-level system (TLS) defects in dielectrics are a major source of decoherence in superconducting circuits, yet their atomistic origin, frequency distribution, and dipole moments remain poorly understood. Current probes, which are predominantly based on qubits or resonators, require complex fabrication and only measure defects within a narrow frequency band and limited mode volume, hindering direct insight into TLS defect behaviour in isolated materials and interfaces. Here, we introduce a broadband 3D waveguide spectroscopy technique that enables cryogenic probing of ensembles of TLS defects that we call Broadband Cryogenic Transient Dielectric Spectroscopy (BCTDS). Complementary to the dielectric dipper method, this approach probes a broader spectrum and reveals interference of drive-induced sidebands of the ensembles of TLS defects. The broadband and power-tunable nature of BCTDS makes it especially well-suited to the study of dressed-state physics in driven ensembles of TLS defects, including multi-photon processes and sideband-resolved dynamics. Additionally, BCTDS enables the identification of eigenmode frequencies of the undriven ensembles of TLS defects through characteristic V-shaped features obtained via Fourier analysis of time-domain signals, and shows evidence of memory effects arising from interactions and the broadband nature of our approach. Crucially, our method is modular and can be applied throughout the device fabrication process, informing mitigation strategies and advancing the design of low-loss materials with broad implications for quantum technologies and materials science.

[132]. [*Magnetic Hysteresis Experiments Performed on Quantum Annealers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17418 "Magnetic Hysteresis Experiments Performed on Quantum Annealers")
Elijah Pelofske, Frank Barrows, Pratik Sathe, Cristiano Nisoli
While quantum annealers have emerged as versatile and controllable platforms for experimenting on correlated spin systems, the important phenomenology of magnetic memory and hysteresis remain unexplored on hardware designed to escape metastable states via quantum tunneling. Here, we present the first general protocol to experiment on magnetic hysteresis on programmable quantum annealers, and implement it on three D-Wave superconducting qubit quantum annealers, using up to thousands of spins, for both ferromagnetic and disordered Ising models, and across different graph topologies. We observe hysteresis loops whose area depends non-monotonically on quantum fluctuations, exhibiting both expected and unexpected features, such as disorder-induced steps and non-monotonicities. Our work establishes quantum annealers as a platform for probing non-equilibrium emergent magnetic phenomena, thereby broadening the role of analog quantum computers into foundational questions in condensed matter physics.

[133]. [*Computational Study of the Spectral Behaviour of Different Isospectrally Patterned Lattices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08351 "Computational Study of the Spectral Behaviour of Different Isospectrally Patterned Lattices")
Peter Schmelcher
We perform a computational spectral analysis of different isospectrally patterned lattices (IPL). Having been introduced very recently, the lattice Hamiltonian of IPL consist of coupled cells which possess all the same set of eigenvalues. The latter is achieved in a controllable manner by parametrizing the cells via the phases of the involved orthogonal (or unitary) transformations. This opens the doorway of systematically designing lattice Hamiltonians with unique properties by choosing correspondingly varying phases across the lattice. Here we focus on two-dimensional cells and explore symmetric as well as asymmetric IPL w.r.t. a given center. A tunable fraction of localized vs. delocalized eigenstates belonging to the three subdomains of the corresponding energy bands is demonstrated and analyzed with different measures of localization. In the asymmetric case the center of localization can be shifted arbitrarily by shifting the underlying phase grid. Introducing a complete phase revolution leads for low and high energies to two well-separated branches of localized states which finally merge with increasing energy into the branch of delocalized states. Remarkably, the localized states appear in near-degenerate pairs and this near-degeneracy is lifted upon entering the delocalization regime. A corresponding generalization to several phase revolutions is provided showing a characteristic nodal pattern among the near-degenerate eigenstates.

[134]. [*Berry Monopole Scattering in the Synthetic Momentum Space of a Bilayer Photonic Crystal Slab*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11983 "Berry Monopole Scattering in the Synthetic Momentum Space of a Bilayer Photonic Crystal Slab")
Ngoc Duc Le, D. -H. -Minh Nguyen, Dung Xuan Nguyen, Hai Son Nguyen, Dario Bercioux
Berry monopoles-quantized sources of Berry curvature-are fundamental to topological phases, yet their scattering remains unexplored. Here, we report for the first time the adiabatic scattering of Berry monopoles in a bilayer photonic crystal slab combining one genuine and one synthetic momentum. Two monopoles approach, collide, and scatter within this hybrid parameter space. The process is described by an effective coupled-mode model and confirmed by full-wave simulations. We further propose an experimental scheme using chiral edge states, opening a route to probe monopole interactions in synthetic photonic systems.

[135]. [*Quantum walks reveal topological flat bands, robust edge states and topological phase transitions in cyclic graphs*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.17250 "Quantum walks reveal topological flat bands, robust edge states and topological phase transitions in cyclic graphs")
Dinesh Kumar Panda, Colin Benjamin
Topological phases, edge states, and flat bands in synthetic quantum systems are a key resource for topological quantum computing and noise-resilient information processing. We introduce a scheme based on step-dependent quantum walks on cyclic graphs, termed cyclic quantum walks (CQWs), to simulate exotic topological phenomena using discrete Fourier transforms and an effective Hamiltonian. Our approach enables the generation of both gapped and gapless topological phases, including Dirac cone-like energy dispersions, topologically nontrivial flat bands, and protected edge states, all without resorting to split-step or split-coin protocols. Odd and even-site cyclic graphs exhibit markedly different spectral characteristics, with rotationally symmetric flat bands emerging exclusively in $4n$-site graphs ($n\in \mathbf{N}$). We analytically establish the conditions for the emergence of topological, gapped flat bands and show that gap closings in rotation space imply the formation of Dirac cones in momentum space. Further, we engineer protected edge states at the interface between distinct topological phases in both odd and even cycle graphs. We numerically demonstrate that the edge states are robust against moderate static and dynamic gate disorder and remain stable against phase-preserving perturbations. This scheme serves as a resource-efficient and versatile platform for engineering topological phases, transitions, edge states, and flat bands in quantum systems, opening new avenues for fault-tolerant quantum technologies.

