[1]. [*X-ray induced quenching of the 229Th clock isomer in CaF2*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03852 "X-ray induced quenching of the 229Th clock isomer in CaF2")
Ming Guan, Michael Bartokos, Kjeld Beeks, Hiroyuki Fujimoto, Yuta Fukunaga, Hiromitsu Haba, Takahiro Hiraki, Yoshitaka Kasamatsu, Shinji Kitao, Adrian Leitner, Takahiko Masuda, Nobumoto Nagasawa, Koichi Okai, Ryoichiro Ogake, Martin Pimon, Martin Pressler, Noboru Sasao, Fabian Schaden, Thorsten Schumm, Makoto Seto, Yudai Shigekawa, Kotaro Shimizu, Tomas Sikorsky, Kenji Tamasaku, Sayuri Takatori, Tsukasa Watanabe, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yoshitaka Yoda, Akihiro Yoshimi, Koji Yoshimura
Thorium-229 has the lowest nuclear-excited state (an isomer state) at approximately 8.356 eV, making it excitable with tabletop vacuum-ultraviolet lasers. Despite the recent success of laser excitation, the isomer quenching inside the solid-state environment remains unresolved. In this letter, we present experiments investigating X-ray-induced isomer quenching in the CaF$_2$ host, focusing on the effects of X-ray flux and temperature on the lifetime and yield of the isomer state. Our studies reveal a correlation between isomer production, isomer lifetime during irradiation, and post-irradiation afterglow of the target crystal across different temperatures, highlighting a strong relationship between isomer quenching and color-center dynamics. We developed a model to interpret the isomer quenching and the crystal's luminescence.

[2]. [*Geometry dependence of the thermal Hall effect in chiral spin liquids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03879 "Geometry dependence of the thermal Hall effect in chiral spin liquids")
G\'abor B. Hal\'asz
Recent thermal-transport experiments on the Kitaev magnet $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$ highlight the challenge in identifying chiral quantum spin liquids through their quantized thermal Hall effect. Here, we propose that variations in the underlying sample geometry -- for example, the introduction of appropriate constrictions -- reveal unique aspects of the thermal Hall effect and can be used to determine its origin. By studying standard phenomenological heat-transport equations based on minimal assumptions, we show that, whereas a conventional thermal Hall effect due to, e.g., phonons or magnons is completely geometry independent, a thermal Hall effect originating from a chiral fermion edge mode is significantly enhanced by constrictions at low temperatures. This unique geometry-dependent signature provides a practical approach for identifying chiral spin liquids in candidate materials like $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$ using currently available thermal-transport experiments.

[3]. [*Transdimensional anomalous Hall effect in rhombohedral thin graphite*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03891 "Transdimensional anomalous Hall effect in rhombohedral thin graphite")
Qingxin Li, Hua Fan, Min Li, Yinghai Xu, Junwei Song, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Hua Jiang, X. C. Xie, James Hone, Cory Dean, Yue Zhao, Jianpeng Liu, Lei Wang
Anomalous Hall effect (AHE), occurring in materials with broken time-reversal symmetry, epitomizes the intricate interplay between magnetic order and orbital motions of electrons[1-4]. In two dimensional (2D) systems, AHE is always coupled with out-of-plane orbital magnetization associated in-plane chiral orbital motions. In three dimensional (3D) systems, carriers can tunnel or scatter along the third dimension within the vertical mean free path lz. When sample thickness far exceeds lz, scattering disrupts coherent out-of-plane motion, making 3D AHE effectively a thickness-averaged 2D counterpart[4]- still governed by out-of-plane orbital magnetization arising from in-plane orbital motions. Here, we explore an uncharted regime where the sample thickness is much larger than the atomic layer thickness yet smaller than or comparable to lz. In such "transdimensional" regime, carriers can sustain coherent orbital motions both within and out of the 2D plane, leading to a fundamentally new type of AHE that couples both out-of-plane and in-plane orbital magnetizations. We report the first observation of such phenomenon- transdimensional AHE (TDAHE)- in electrostatically gated rhombohedral ennealayer graphene. This state emerges from a peculiar metallic phase that spontaneously breaks time-reversal, mirror and rotational symmetries driven by electron-electron interactions. Such TDAHE manifests as concurrent out-of-plane and in-plane Hall resistance hysteresis, controlled by external magnetic fields along either direction. Our findings unveils a new class of AHE, opening an unexplored paradigm for correlated and topological physics in transdimensional systems.

[4]. [*Spectroscopic evidence of intra-unit-cell charge redistribution in charge-neutral magnetic topological insulator Sb-doped MnBi6Te10*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03894 "Spectroscopic evidence of intra-unit-cell charge redistribution in charge-neutral magnetic topological insulator Sb-doped MnBi6Te10")
Khanh Duy Nguyen, Gabriele Berruto, Seng Huat Lee, Yunhe Bai, Haoran Lin, Qiang Gao, Zhiqiang Mao, Shuolong Yang
The magnetic topological insulator MnBi$_{6}$Te$_{10}$ has emerged as a promising candidate for realizing the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE), owing to its ability to retain ferromagnetism through precise control of anti-site defects. The next important task for realizing the QAHE is to tune the chemical potential into the energy gap formed by the broken time-reversal symmetry. Here we reveal an intra-unit-cell charge redistribution even when the overall doping suggests a near-charge-neutral condition. By performing time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (trARPES) on the optimally 18% Sb-doped MnBi$_{6}$Te$_{10}$, we observe transient surface photovoltage (SPV) effects on both the MnBi$_{2}$Te$_{4}$ and single-Bi$_{2}$Te$_{3}$ terminations. Furthermore, we observe a time-dependent splitting of the band structure indicating multiple SPV shifts with different magnitudes. This observation suggests that adjacent plateaus with nominally the same terminating layer exhibit a strong intra-unit-cell charge redistribution, resulting in spontaneous electrical polarization. This is consistent with static micro-ARPES measurements revealing significant doping deviations from the charge-neutral configuration. Our findings underscore the challenges of engineering the family of Mn-Bi-Te materials to realize QAHE purely through chemical doping. Achieving the desired topological quantum phase requires both a uniform carrier doping and a ferromagnetic ground state. Furthermore, the light-induced polarization within each unit cell of ferromagnetic Mn(Bi$_{0.82}$Sb$_{0.18}$)$_{6}$Te$_{10}$ may open new possibilities for optoelectronic and spintronics.

[5]. [*Direct evidence of light-induced phase-fluctuations in cuprates via time-resolved ARPES*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03900 "Direct evidence of light-induced phase-fluctuations in cuprates via time-resolved ARPES")
D. Armanno, F. Goto, J. -M. Parent, S. Lapointe, A. Longa, R. D. Zhong, J. Schneeloch, G. D. Gu, G. Jargot, H. Ibrahim, F. Legare, B. J. Siwick, N. Gauthier, F. Boschini
Phase fluctuations are widely accepted to play a primary role in the quench of the long-range superconducting order in cuprates. However, an experimental probe capable of unambiguously assessing their impact on the superconducting order parameter with momentum and time resolutions is still lacking. Here, we performed a high-resolution time- and angle-resolved photoemission study of optimally-doped Bi$_2$Sr$_2$CaCu$_2$O$_{8+\delta}$ and demonstrated a new experimental strategy to directly probe light-induced changes in the order parameter's phase with momentum resolution. To do this, we tracked the ultrafast response of a phase-sensitive hybridization gap that appears at the crossing between two bands with opposite superconducting gap signs. Supported by theoretical modeling, we established phase fluctuations as the dominant factor defining the non-thermal response of the unconventional superconducting phase in cuprates.

[6]. [*Directional Thermal Emission Across Both Polarizations in Planar Photonic Architectures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03905 "Directional Thermal Emission Across Both Polarizations in Planar Photonic Architectures")
David E. Abraham, Daniel Cui, Baolai Liang, Jae S. Hwang, Parthiban Santhanam, Linus Kim, Rayen Lin, Aaswath P. Raman
Directional and spectral control of thermal emission is essential for applications in energy conversion, imaging, and sensing. Existing planar, lithography-free epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) films only support transverse-magnetic (TM) control of thermal emission via the Berreman mode and cannot address transverse-electric (TE) waves due to the absence of natural optical magnetism over optical and infrared wavelengths Here, we introduce a hyperbolic metamaterial comprising alternating layers of degenerately-doped and intrinsic InAs that exhibits an epsilon-and-mu-near-zero (EMNZ) response, enabling dual-polarized, directionally and spectrally selective thermal emission. We first theoretically demonstrate that a mu-near-zero (MNZ) film on a perfect magnetic conductor supports a magnetic Berreman mode, absorbing TE-polarized radiation in analogy to the conventional Berreman mode supported in TM polarization. Using genetic and gradient-descent optimization, we design a dual-polarized emitter with independently tunable spectral peaks and emission angles. Parameter retrieval via homogenization confirms simultaneous EMNZ points at the target wavelengths and angles. Finally, experimental measurement of a sample fabricated via molecular beam epitaxy exhibits high absorptivity peaks for both polarizations in close agreement with simulations. This work realizes lithography-free, dual-polarized, spectrally and directionally selective emitters, offering a versatile platform for advanced infrared thermal management and device integration.

[7]. [*Large critical current density Josephson $\pi$ junctions with PdNi barriers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03913 "Large critical current density Josephson $\pi$ junctions with PdNi barriers")
Arjun Sapkota, Robert M. Klaes, Reza Loloee, Norman O. Birge, Nathan Satchell
We report large critical current densities in $\text{Nb} / \text{Pd}_{89}\text{Ni}_{11} / \text{Nb}$ Josephson junctions at thicknesses of $\text{Pd}_{89}\text{Ni}_{11}$ close to where the first $\pi$-state is expected. We observe possible oscillations in the critical current density with the thickness of the $\text{Pd}_{89}\text{Ni}_{11}$ layer that are consistent with a $0-\pi$ transition. From temperature-dependent measurements, we find a large critical current density through our $\text{Pd}_{89}\text{Ni}_{11}$ barriers, exceeding 550 $\text{kA/cm}^2$ at 2 K in zero applied magnetic field, for a barrier thickness of 9.4 nm. From measurements of magnetization on sheet film samples, we confirm that the $\text{Pd}_{89}\text{Ni}_{11}$ layer exhibits perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Both the large critical current density and the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy are beneficial for proposed applications of $\pi$-junctions in superconducting digital logic and qubits.

[8]. [*Microscopic theory of phonon polaritons and long wavelength dielectric response*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03915 "Microscopic theory of phonon polaritons and long wavelength dielectric response")
Olle Hellman, Leeor Kronik
We present a first-principles approach for calculating phonon-polariton dispersion relations. In this approach, phonon-photon interaction is described by quantization of a Hamiltonian that describes harmonic lattice vibrations coupled with the electromagnetic field inside the material. All Hamiltonian parameters are obtained from first-principles calculations, with diagonalization leading to non-interacting polariton quasiparticles. This method naturally includes retardation effects and resolves non-analytical behavior and ambiguities in phonon frequencies at the Brillouin zone center, especially in non-cubic and optically anisotropic materials. Furthermore, by incorporating higher-order terms in the Hamiltonian, we also account for quasiparticle interactions and spectral broadening. Specifically, we show how anharmonic effects in phonon polaritons lead to a dielectric response that challenges traditional models. The accuracy and consequences of the approach are demonstrated on GaP and GaN as harmonic test systems and PbTe and $\beta$-Ga$_2$O$_3$ as anharmonic test systems.

[9]. [*The study of Ag(Cu) center creation in quartz crystals by thermal annealing at 1200C in oxygen atmosphere from metallic Ag and Au*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03918 "The study of Ag(Cu) center creation in quartz crystals by thermal annealing at 1200C in oxygen atmosphere from metallic Ag and Au")
Anatoly Trukhin, Madara Leimane
The study of silver or copper center creation in quartz crystals by thermal annealing at 1200C in oxygen atmosphere from metallic silver and gold. Previously, the effect of treatment in oxygen atmosphere at high temperatures on copper luminescence centers in quartz was discovered. In this work, we investigated the effect of such treatment on silver centers in quartz, studied previously. Also, a series of non-activated crystalline quartz samples were thermally annealed at 1200C in an oxygen atmosphere together with metallic silver. An attempt was made to introduce gold into quartz by such treatment in oxygen. Both high-purity gold and containing parasitic impurities of silver and copper were used. In the latter case, we obtained silver and copper luminescence centers but were unable to identify the luminescence of centers associated with Au.

[10]. [*Electron Model on Truchet Tiling: Extended-to-Localized Transitions, Mobility Edge, and Asymmetric Spectrum*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03925 "Electron Model on Truchet Tiling: Extended-to-Localized Transitions, Mobility Edge, and Asymmetric Spectrum")
Junmo Jeon, Shiro Sakai
Motivated by recent advances in the realization of Truchet-tiling structures in molecular networks and metal-organic frameworks, we investigate the wave localization issue in this kind of structure. We introduce an electron model based on random Truchet tilings-square lattices with randomly oriented diagonal links-and uncover a rich interplay between spectral and localization phenomena. By varying the strength of diagonal couplings, we demonstrate successive transitions from an extended phase, through a regime with a mobility edge, to a fully localized phase. The energy-resolved fractal dimension analysis captures the emergence and disappearance of mobility edges, while an anomalous shift and asymmetry in the van Hove singularity are identified as key signatures of the underlying disordered Truchet-tiling structure. Our findings position Truchet-tiled electron systems as a versatile platform for engineering disorder-driven localization and interaction effects in amorphous quantum materials and photonic architectures.

[11]. [*Observation of Order and Disorder in Solid-Electrolyte Interphases of Lithium-Metal Anodes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03956 "Observation of Order and Disorder in Solid-Electrolyte Interphases of Lithium-Metal Anodes")
Hyeongjun Koh, Eric Detsi, Eric A. Stach
Battery interfaces critically influence lithium-metal battery performance through their role in ion diffusion and dendrite formation. However, structural characterization of these interfaces has remained challenging due to limitations in high-resolution methods and artifacts from electron irradiation. Using cryogenic conditions for both specimen preparation and scanning electron nanobeam diffraction, we can determine the structural organization at the interface between the vitrified electrolyte and adjacent layers. We identified two distinct interface types: one showing short-range order adjacent to lithium metal, and another displaying a mixed structure of short-range ordering and defective lithium fluoride nanoscale crystallites at a copper collector. Notably, short-range order appeared exclusively in electrolytes demonstrating high reversibility. Our results establish that solid-electrolyte-interphase structure directly influences lithium deposition morphology and battery performance. This methodology opens new possibilities for high-resolution characterization of interfaces in energy storage materials, advancing our understanding of their critical structural properties.

[12]. [*Anomalous grain dynamics and grain locomotion of odd crystals*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03957 "Anomalous grain dynamics and grain locomotion of odd crystals")
Zhi-Feng Huang, Michael te Vrugt, Raphael Wittkowski, Hartmut L\"owen
Crystalline or polycrystalline systems governed by odd elastic responses are known to exhibit complex dynamical behaviors involving self-propelled dynamics of topological defects with spontaneous self-rotation of chiral crystallites. Unveiling and controlling the underlying mechanisms require studies across multiple scales. We develop such a type of approach that bridges between microscopic and mesoscopic scales, in the form of a phase field crystal model incorporating transverse interactions. This continuum density field theory features two-dimensional parity symmetry breaking and odd elasticity, and generates a variety of interesting phenomena that agree well with recent experiments and particle-based simulations of active and living chiral crystals, including self-rotating crystallites, dislocation self-propulsion and proliferation, and fragmentation in polycrystals. We identify a distinct type of surface cusp instability induced by self-generated surface odd stress that results in self-fission of single-crystalline grains. This mechanism is pivotal for the occurrence of various anomalous grain dynamics for odd crystals, particularly the predictions of a transition from normal to reverse Ostwald ripening for self-rotating odd grains, and a transition from grain coarsening to grain self-fragmentation in the dynamical polycrystalline state with an increase of transverse interaction strength. We also demonstrate that the single-grain dynamics can be maneuvered through the variation of interparticle transverse interactions. This allows to steer the desired pathway of grain locomotion and to control the transition between grain self-rotation, self-rolling, and self-translation. Our results provide insights for the design and control of structural and dynamical properties of active odd elastic materials.

[13]. [*Electron-Phonon Coupling in Correlated Metals: A Dynamical Mean-Field Theory Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03958 "Electron-Phonon Coupling in Correlated Metals: A Dynamical Mean-Field Theory Study")
David J. Abramovitch, Jennifer Coulter, Sophie Beck, Andrew Millis
Strong electron-electron interactions are known to significantly modify the electron-phonon coupling relative to the predictions of density functional theory, but this effect is challenging to calculate with realistic theories of strongly correlated materials. Here we define and calculate a version of the EPC applicable beyond band theory by combining first principles density functional theory plus dynamical mean-field theory with finite difference phonon perturbations, presenting results for several representative phonon modes in two materials of interest. In the three-orbital correlated metal SrVO$_3$, we find that intra-V-$t_{2g}$ band correlation significantly increases the coupling of these electrons to a Jahn-Teller phonon mode that splits the degenerate orbital energies, while slightly reducing the coupling associated with a breathing phonon that couples to the charge on each V atom. In the infinite layer cuprate CaCuO$_2$, we find that local correlation within the $d_{x^2-y^2}$ orbital derived band has a modest effect on coupling of near-Fermi surface electrons to optical breathing modes. In both cases, the interaction correction to the electron-phonon coupling predicted by dynamical mean-field theory has a significant dependence on the electronic frequency, arising from a lattice-distortion dependence of the correlated electron dynamics, showing the inadequacy of the simple picture in which correlations change static local susceptibilities. We also show that the electron-phonon scattering and phonon lifetimes associated with these phonon modes are modified by the electronic correlation. Our findings shed light on the material- and mode-specific role of dynamical electronic correlation in electron-phonon coupling and highlight the importance of developing efficient computational methods for treating electron-phonon coupling in correlated materials.

[14]. [*Sound Attenuation in Glasses*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04026 "Sound Attenuation in Glasses")
Grzegorz Szamel, Elijah Flenner
Comprehending sound damping is integral to understanding the anomalous low temperature properties of glasses. Despite decades of studies, the underlying mechanism of sound damping in glasses is still debated. In this perspective we review recent work on sound damping in amorphous solids. We focus on the role of defects, heterogeneous elasticity, and damping in model amorphous solids without defects. We review our definition of damping defects and show that they strongly influence sound damping. However, we also find another contribution to sound damping that cannot be attributed to damping defects. We confirm an earlier result of Kapteijns et al. [G. Kapteijns et al., J. Chem. Phys. 154, 081101 (2021)] that heterogeneous elasticity theory predicts relative changes of sound damping in model two-dimensional glasses if the configuration-to-configuration elastic constants fluctuations are used to quantify the heterogeneity. We extend this finding to similar three-dimensional glasses. We end by discussing the Euclidean Random Matrix model, which exhibits Rayleigh scaling of sound damping, but does not have quasi-localized excitations, and thus probably does not have sound damping defects. We propose that the mechanisms behind sound damping can be more fully understood by approaching the problem from two directions, one where the strong influence of defects is studied and another where sound damping is studied in defect free albeit disordered materials.

[15]. [*Investigation of Low Frequency Noise in CryoCMOS devices through Statistical Single Defect Spectroscopy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04030 "Investigation of Low Frequency Noise in CryoCMOS devices through Statistical Single Defect Spectroscopy")
Edoardo Catapano, Anirudh Varanasi, Philippe Roussel, Robin Degraeve, Yusuke Higashi, Ruben Asanovski, Ben Kaczer, Javier Diaz Fortuny, Michael Waltl, Valeri Afanasiev, Kristiaan De Greve, Alexander Grill
High 1/f noise in CryoCMOS devices is a critical parameter to keep under control in the design of complex circuits for low temperatures applications. Current models predict the 1/f noise to scale linearly with temperature, and gate oxide defects are expected to freeze out at cryogenic temperatures. Nevertheless, it has been repeatedly observed that 1/f noise deviates from the predicted behaviour and that gate oxide defects are still active around 4.2 K, producing random telegraph noise. In this paper, we probe single gate oxide defects in 2500 nMOS devices down to 5 K in order to investigate the origin of 1/f noise in CryoCMOS devices. From our results, it is clear that the number of defects active at cryogenic temperatures resulting in random telegraph noise is larger than at 300 K. Threshold voltage shifts due to charged defects are shown to be exponentially distributed, with different modalities across temperatures and biases: from monomodal at 300 K to trimodal below 100 K. The third mode is interpreted in the framework of percolation theory. By fitting these distributions, it is shown that more than 80% of the detected defects belongs to the oxide bulk. Afterwards, starting from the raw data in time domain, we reconstruct the low frequency noise spectra, highlighting the contributions of defects belonging to different branches and, therefore, to different oxide layers. This analysis shows that, although interface traps and large defects associated with the third mode are the main sources of 1/f noise at 5 K, bulk oxide defects still contribute significantly to low-frequency noise at cryogenic temperatures. Finally, we show that defect time constants and step heights are uncorrelated, proving that elastic tunnelling model for charge trapping is not accurate.

[16]. [*Study of the Extended Yard Sale model of wealth distribution on Erd\H{o}s-R\'enyi random networks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04032 "Study of the Extended Yard Sale model of wealth distribution on Erd\H{o}s-R\'enyi random networks")
Nicol\'as Vazquez Von Bibow, Juan I. Perotti
Excessive wealth concentration can undermine economic and social development. Random Asset Exchange (RAE) models provide valuable tools to investigate this phenomenon. Assuming that economic systems may operate optimally near the critical point of a continuous phase transition, the Extended Yard Sale (EYS) model introduced by Boghosian et al.~[Physica A 476, 15 (2017)] offers a compelling framework. This model captures the interplay between wealth redistribution and accumulation, exhibiting a continuous phase transition marked by a broad wealth distribution at criticality, separating a condensed phase -- where a microscopic fraction of agents holds a macroscopic share of total wealth -- from a distributed phase with a light-tailed wealth distribution. While the original EYS model assumes fully connected interactions, this work introduces and studies a networked variant where agents interact over Erd\H{o}s-R\'enyi random networks. The analysis combines Monte Carlo simulations with Quenched Mean Field and Mean Field approximations, exploring a variety of interaction and taxation schemes. A scaling analysis shows that, although the networked model also undergoes a continuous phase transition, it leads to local wealth condensation rather than the global condensation found in the fully connected case. These results deepen our understanding of wealth dynamics in structured populations and may help inform the development of more effective economic and social policies.

[17]. [*Mean-field Mixed Quantum-Classical Approach for Many-Body Quantum Dynamics of Exciton-Polaritons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04044 "Mean-field Mixed Quantum-Classical Approach for Many-Body Quantum Dynamics of Exciton-Polaritons")
Pritha Ghosh, Arshath Manjalingal, Sachith Wickramasinghe, Saeed Rahmanian Koshkaki, Arkajit Mandal
In this work, we use a mixed quantum-classical (mean-field) many-body approach for simulating the quantum dynamics of excitons and exciton-polaritons beyond the single-excitation subspace. We combine the multitrajectory Ehrenfest approach, which propagates slow degrees of freedom classically, with the Gross-Pitaevskii method, which propagates fast degrees of freedom in a mean-field fashion. We use this mean-field many-body Ehrenfest approach to analyze how the phonon-induced dynamic disorder and the many-body interaction affect the incoherent and coherent dynamics of excitons and exciton-polaritons. We examine how the number of excitations and the strength of repulsive exciton-exciton interaction nonlinearly influence the transport, Fr\"ohlich scattering and decoherence.

[18]. [*Regional chemical potential analysis for material surfaces*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04053 "Regional chemical potential analysis for material surfaces")
Masahiro Fukuda, Masato Senami, Yoshiaki Sugimoto, Taisuke Ozaki
We propose a local regional chemical potential (RCP) analysis method based on an energy window scheme to quantitatively estimate the selectivity of atomic and molecular adsorption on surfaces, as well as the strength of chemical bonding forces between a probe tip and a surface in atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. In particular, focusing on the local picture of covalent bonding, we use a simple H2 molecular model to demonstrate a clear relationship between chemical bonding forces and the local RCP. Moreover, density functional theory calculations on molecular systems and diamond C(001) surfaces reveal that the local RCP at the surfaces success- fully visualizes electron-donating regions such as dangling bonds and double bonds. These results suggest that the local RCP can serve as an effective measure to analyze high-resolution non-contact or near-contact AFM images enhanced by chemical bonding forces.

[19]. [*Magnetic properties of nitrogen doped diamond: A first principles study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04064 "Magnetic properties of nitrogen doped diamond: A first principles study")
Homnath Luitel
The magnetic and electrical properties of nitrogen doped diamond system have been studied within the framework of a density functional theoretical approach. Spin-polarised calculations reveal that only the nitrogen doped system with adjacent carbon vacancies (NV-centre) leads to stable magnetism in N-doped diamond. The magnitude of the induced magnetic moment increases linearly with increasing number of NV centres in the system. This result explains earlier experimental reports suggesting unconventional magnetism in N-doped pristine diamond. The 2p-orbital electrons of the three carbon atoms adjacent to the vacancy contribute to the magnetic moment in the system. Notably, lone N at the lattice site in diamond system fails to induce any significant moment, whearas the C-vacancy and N-interstitial positions induce magnetic moment in the diamond system. Moreover, the NV-center system has p-type semiconducting characteristics, making it a potential candidate for spintronics applications. To quantify the feasibility of different systems, the magnetic moment, ground state free energy, Fermi energy and defect formation energy were calculated for each structure.

[20]. [*Scalable Asynchronous Single Flux Quantum Up-Down Counter using Josephson Trapping Lines and {\alpha}-Cells*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04069 "Scalable Asynchronous Single Flux Quantum Up-Down Counter using Josephson Trapping Lines and {\alpha}-Cells")
Mustafa Altay Karamuftuoglu, Beyza Zeynep Ucpinar, Sasan Razmkhah, Massoud Pedram
We present a scalable, clockless up-down counter architecture implemented using single-flux quantum (SFQ) logic to enable efficient state management in superconductor digital systems. The proposed design eliminates the reliance on clocked storage elements by introducing the Josephson Trapping Line (JTrL). This bidirectional pulse-trapping structure enables persistent, non-volatile state storage without clocking. The counter integrates $\upalpha$-cells with a splitter (SPL) element to make bidirectional data propagation possible and support multi-fanout connectivity. The design supports increment, decrement, and read operations and includes a control unit that guarantees correct output behavior across all valid state transitions. Circuit-level simulations based on SPICE models demonstrate robust bidirectional functionality across a 3-bit state range [-4 to +4] at an operating frequency of 4 GHz. The proposed counter offers a modular and scalable solution suitable for integration into larger superconducting systems targeting quantum computing, neuromorphic processing, and cryogenic sensing applications.

[21]. [*Differentiation of Distinct Single Atoms via Multi-Defocus Fusion Method*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04078 "Differentiation of Distinct Single Atoms via Multi-Defocus Fusion Method")
Yangfan Li, Yue Pan, Xincheng Lei, Weiwei Chen, Yang Shen, Mengshu Ge, Xiaozhi Liu, Dong Su
High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) is a vital tool for characterizing single-atom catalysts (SACs). However, reliable elemental identification of different atoms remains challenging because the signal intensity of HAADF depends strongly on defocus and other imaging parameters, potentially ruining the Z-contrast of atoms at different depths. In this work, we investigated the influence of the vertical position of atoms (defocus), support thickness, interatomic height, convergence and collection angles via multi-slice simulations on a model system of Fe/Pt atoms on amorphous carbon supports. Our calculation shows that at a convergence angle of 28 mrad, a defocus of 4.6 nm can cause Fe and Pt atoms indistinguishable. At a larger convergence angle, this critical indistinguishable defocus can be even shorter. To address this limitation, we propose a Multi-Defocus Fusion (MDF) method, retrieving the Z-contrast from serial images from multiple defocus. Experimental validation on a Fe/Pt SAC sample confirms the effectiveness of MDF, yielding clearly separated intensity histograms corresponding to Fe and Pt atoms. This work presents a robust, easy-to-implement strategy for accurate single-atom identification, offering valuable guidance for the accelerated screening and rational design of high-performance SACs.

[22]. [*Dynamic scaling of vorticity in phase-separating superfluid mixtures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04079 "Dynamic scaling of vorticity in phase-separating superfluid mixtures")
Ryuta Ito, Hiromitsu Takeuchi
Recently, it has been experimentally confirmed that non-equilibrium dynamics of phase separation in strongly ferromagnetic Bose-Einstein condensates of 7Li atoms obey the dynamic scaling law belonging to the binary- fluid universality class in the inertial hydrodynamic stage. The current work theoretically and numerically studies the dynamic scaling law of structure factor of vorticity in a phase-separating binary superfluid mixture, equivalent to the 7Li condensates in a strong limit of quadratic Zeeman shift. We found a dynamic scaling law for the structure factor based on our numerical observation that the peak of the energy spectrum from turbulence theory does not vary in time in the stage. Similarly to freely decaying turbulence, a power-law hierarchy exists in the energy spectrum in our system, and we proposed a decay law of the energy based on the dynamic scaling law by introducing the microscopic, high-wavenumber cutoff.

[23]. [*Direct Bandgap Photoluminescence of GeSn grown on Si(100) substrate by Molecular Beam Epitaxy Growth*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04096 "Direct Bandgap Photoluminescence of GeSn grown on Si(100) substrate by Molecular Beam Epitaxy Growth")
Diandian Zhang, Nirosh M. Eldose, Dinesh Baral, Hryhorii Stanchu, Sudip Acharya, Fernando Maia de Oliveira, Mourad Benamara, Haochen Zhao, Yuping Zeng, Wei Du, Gregory J. Salamo, Shui-Qing Yu
Group IV alloys of GeSn have gained significant attention for electronic and optoelectronic applications on a Si platform due to their compatibility with existing CMOS technology, tunable band structure, and potential for a direct bandgap at high Sn concentrations. However, synthesizing Sn-rich GeSn structures remains challenging due to the low solid solubility of Sn in Ge (less than 1%) and the substantial lattice mismatch ( about 14%) between Sn and Ge. In this work, we demonstrate the successful growth of high-quality, relaxed GeSn layers with Sn contents of 9.2% and 11.4% on Si(100) substrates via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). As far as we know, this is the first report of direct bandgap photoluminescence observed from MBE-grown GeSn films without post-growth annealing. Structural characterizations including X-ray diffraction (XRD), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) confirm uniform Sn incorporation with minimal defect formation. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) reveals smooth surfaces with low roughness. Temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) measurements further confirm direct bandgap emission, representing a new stage in the development of MBE-grown GeSn.

[24]. [*A Mesoscale Model for Interface-Mediated Plasticity: Investigation of Ductile and Brittle Fracture*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04099 "A Mesoscale Model for Interface-Mediated Plasticity: Investigation of Ductile and Brittle Fracture")
Jinxin Yu, Alfonso H. W. Ngan, David J. Srolovitzb, Jian Hana
The presence of interfaces and grain boundaries significantly impacts the mechanical properties of materials, particularly when dealing with micro- or nano-scale samples. Distinct interactions between dislocations and grain boundaries can lead to entirely different overall plastic deformation characteristics. This paper employs a two-dimensional continuum dislocation dynamics model to investigate the mechanical properties of materials. To accurately depict the physical interactions between lattice dislocations and interfaces/grain boundaries, we apply a mesoscale interface boundary condition, considering various numerical cases, such as single and multiple slip systems. Apart from affecting strength and ductility, the accumulation of dislocations near the interface can induce local high stress, potentially resulting in brittle fracture near the interface. Consequently, materials experience a competition between ductile and brittle fracture modes during the loading process. A phenomenon known as the strain hardening rate up-turn is also investigated under different reaction constants, which can be explained by the competition between the rates of dislocation accumulation and reaction at the interface.

[25]. [*Generic (fractional) quantum anomalous Hall crystals from interaction-driven band folding*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04138 "Generic (fractional) quantum anomalous Hall crystals from interaction-driven band folding")
Hongyu Lu, Han-Qing Wu, Bin-Bin Chen, Wang Yao, Zi Yang Meng
The experimental realizations of fractional quantum anomalous Hall (FQAH) states have been achieved recently, and there is a growing number of experiments in moir\'e systems showing the inequality between the filling of the Chern band and the quantized Hall conductance: $\nu\neq\sigma_\mathrm{H}$. Among many possible explanations, a popular one is that the topological states have coexisting charge density wave (CDW) orders, and such states are referred to as Hall crystals. However, apart from the experimental uncertainties, the generic mechanism of Hall crystals, especially those with fractional $\sigma_\mathrm{H}$ is still elusive at the microscopic level. In this work, we numerically study a topological flat-band model and find that, the Chern band can be folded by the interaction-driven CDW, and a mini Chern band appears above the CDW gap. Through further analysis, we find the energy dispersion and the fluctuation of quantum geometry of the miniband could be flattened by competing interactions. When further doping this miniband, a series of (F)QAH states are found to coexist with the CDW order at (fractional)integer fillings of the miniband and the Hall conductivities of the FQAH crystals (FQAHCs)- determined by the fillings of the miniband - are different from the fillings of the original Chern band. We also study the thermodynamics of an FQAHC state and find the separation of energy scales and a compressible CDW phase at intermediate temperatures. Our work paves the way for the systematic understanding of (fractional) Hall crystals.

[26]. [*Crossover of Superconductivity across the end point of antiferromagnetic phase in FeSe$_{\rm 1-x}$S$_{\rm x}$ under pressure*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04156 "Crossover of Superconductivity across the end point of antiferromagnetic phase in FeSe$_{\rm 1-x}$S$_{\rm x}$ under pressure")
Kiyotaka Miyoshi, Hironobu Nakatani, Yumi Yamamoto, Takumi Maeda, Daichi Izuhara, Ikumi Matsushima
Temperature-pressure ($T$-$P$) phase diagrams of FeSe$_{\rm 1-x}$S$_{\rm x}$ were investigated by the measurements of dc magnetization ($M$) and electrical resistivity ($\rho$) under pressure, using single crystal specimens with $x$=0.04, 0.08 and 0.13. We observed a crossover of the superconductivity with increasing $P$ near the end point of antiferromagnetic (AFM) phase, where two superconducting phases coexist within a pressure width of $\Delta$$P$$\sim$1 GPa, having different $T_{\rm c}$s. These results suggest that the superconducting phases inside and outside the AFM phase have different origins.

[27]. [*Complete suppression of flux instabilities in ramped superconducting magnets with synchronous temperature-modulated Jc*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04159 "Complete suppression of flux instabilities in ramped superconducting magnets with synchronous temperature-modulated Jc")
Cun Xue, Han-Xi Ren, Kai-Wei Cao, Wei Liu, Wen-Tao Zhang, Fang Yang, Guo Yan, You-He Zhou, Pingxiang Zhang
Nonlinear multifield coupling as an intrinsic property of complex physical systems often leads to abrupt and undesired instabilities.For currentramped high field Nb3Sn magnets, frequent flux jumps are observed, which easily causes premature quenches and requires prolonged and resourceintensive magnet training process.In this study, we propose a paradigm shifting methodology framework that achieves complete suppression of thermomagnetic instabilities through synchronized temperature-modulated critical current density Jc.Through numerical simulations of flux jumps in multifilamentary Nb3Sn wires exposed to a time varying magnetic field at various temperatures, we construct thermomagnetic stability diagram in the Ha-T plane.The simulated results are in good agreement with experimental measurements, which demonstrates the synchronized ramped down temperature can indeed fully eliminate flux jumps.We reveal the underlying physical mechanism of enhancing the thermomagnetic stability arises from that synchronized ramped-down temperature can continuously tune both Jc and its slope.Furthermore, we carry out numerical simulations for the thermomagnetic instabilities of current-ramped superconducting magnets through large-scale GPU-optimized algorithm with home-made codes. The flux jump and quench diagram in the Ia-T plane are obtained.It indicates that the ramped-down temperature can completely suppress flux jumps without compromising Jc at high magnetic fields.Importantly, this method does not require modifications to the superconducting microstructures or fabrication process, offering a practical and broadly applicable solution.The findings offer a robust method to stabilize diverse superconducting magnet systems (including 2nd-gen coated tape HTS magnets), and propose a generalizable strategy for controlling instability in nonlinear non-equilibrium physical systems.

[28]. [*A Predictive Theory of Electrochemical Ostwald Ripening for Electrodeposited Lithium Metal*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04198 "A Predictive Theory of Electrochemical Ostwald Ripening for Electrodeposited Lithium Metal")
Hanning Zhang, Oleg V. Yazyev, Ruslan Yamaletdinov
In this work, we present a theoretical framework that describes the evolution of lithium nuclei under the competing effects of electroplating and surface energy-driven redistribution (electrochemical Ostwald ripening). Our model introduces a formulation that accounts for solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) resistance, electrolyte conductivity, and electrode wettability, capturing the transition from SEI to electrolyte-limited growth regimes. We identify asymptotic behaviors for high and low current densities, quantify the conditions under which ripening dominates, and derive analytical expressions for nucleus size, density, and surface coverage. Model predictions show excellent agreement with experimental data across multiple datasets. The results reveal how SEI and electrolyte conductivity, current density and metal-electrode contact angle govern deposition morphology and Coulombic efficiency. Based on these insights, we outline experimentally accessible guidelines to improve battery efficiency and cycling stability - offering a simple yet predictive approach for optimizing metal electrodeposition processes in battery systems and beyond.

[29]. [*WKB energy levels in gapped graphene under crossed electromagnetic fields*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04202 "WKB energy levels in gapped graphene under crossed electromagnetic fields")
I. O. Nimyi, S. G. Sharapov, V. P. Gusynin
We consider a single layer of graphene subjected to a magnetic field $H$ applied perpendicular to the layer and an in-plane constant radial electric field $E$. The Dirac equation for this configuration does not admit analytical solutions in terms of known special functions. Using the WKB approximation, we demonstrate that for gapped graphene the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition for eigenenergies includes an additional valley-dependent geometrical phase. When this term is accounted for, the WKB approximation exhibits good agreement with results from the exact diagonalization method except to the lowest Landau level.

[30]. [*Diffusion in a wedge geometry: First-Passage Statistics under Stochastic Resetting*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04208 "Diffusion in a wedge geometry: First-Passage Statistics under Stochastic Resetting")
Fazil Najeeb, Arnab Pal, V. V. Prasad
We study the diffusion process in the presence of stochastic resetting inside a two-dimensional wedge of top angle $\alpha$, bounded by two infinite absorbing edges. In the absence of resetting, the second moment of the first-passage time diverges for $\alpha>\pi/4$ while it remains finite for $\alpha<\pi/4$, resulting in an unbounded or bounded coefficient of variation in the respective angular regimes. Upon introducing stochastic resetting, we analyze the first-passage properties in both cases and identify the geometric configurations in which resetting consistently enhances the rate of absorption or escape through the boundaries. By deriving the expressions for the probability currents and conditional first-passage quantities such as splitting probabilities and conditional mean first-passage times, we demonstrate how resetting can be employed to bias the escape pathway through the favorable boundary. Our theoretical predictions are verified through Langevin-type numerical simulations, showing excellent agreement.

[31]. [*Defect engineering and effect of vacancy concentration on the electrochemical performance of V-based MXenes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04226 "Defect engineering and effect of vacancy concentration on the electrochemical performance of V-based MXenes")
Leiqiang Qin, Rutuparna Samal, Jianxia Jiang, Joseph Halim, Ningjun Chen, Florian Chabanais, Per O. A. Persson, Johanna Rosen
Vacancies play a pivotal role in determining the physical and chemical properties of materials. Introducing vacancies into two-dimensional (2D) materials offers a promising strategy for developing high-performance electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage. Herein, a facile top-down strategy is employed to create V-based MXenes with tunable vacancy concentrations, achieved by designing the precursor (V1-xCrx)2AlC (x=0.05, 0.1, 0.3) MAX phase and precisely controlling the etching process. Systematic investigations reveal that introducing a moderate concentration of Cr-induced vacancies significantly enhances both the capacitance and rate performance of V-based MXenes. Specifically, V1.9CTz achieves a capacitance of 760 F g-1, far exceeding the 420 F g-1 of vacancy-free V2CTz MXene. In contrast, an excessively high vacancy concentration lead to deteriorated electrochemical performance and compromised structural stability. This work illustrates that defect engineering is a powerful approach to tailor the electrochemical properties of MXenes, offering a framework for designing next-generation MXene-based energy storage systems.

[32]. [*Exotic magnetic phase diagram and extremely robust antiferromagnetism in Ce$_2$RhIn$_8$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04238 "Exotic magnetic phase diagram and extremely robust antiferromagnetism in Ce$_2$RhIn$_8$")
T. Klein, C. Marcenat, A. Demuer, J. Sarrade, D. Aoki, I. Sheikin
The antiferromagnetic heavy-fermion compound Ce$_2$RhIn$_8$ belongs to the same family and bears similarities with the well-studied prototypical material CeRhIn$_5$, which demonstrates a unique behavior under applied magnetic field. Here, we report specific-heat measurements on a high-quality single crystal of Ce$_2$RhIn$_8$ in magnetic fields up to 35 T applied along both principal crystallographic directions. When the magnetic field is applied along the $a$ axis of the tetragonal crystal structure, two additional field-induced antiferromagnetic phases are observed, in agreement with previous reports. One of them is confined in a small area of the field-temperature phase diagram. The other one, which develops above $\sim$2.5 T, is very robust against the field. Its transition temperature increases with field, reaches a maximum at $\sim$12 T, and then starts to decrease. However, it tends to saturate towards the highest field of our measurements. For a field applied along the $c$ axis, the N\'{e}el temperature, $T_N$, initially decreases with field, as expected for a typical antiferromagnet. Surprisingly, an additional phase emerges above $\sim$10 T. It is most likely to be of the same origin as its counterpart observed above 2.5 T for the other field orientation. This phase is also unusually robust: Its transition temperature increases all the way up to 35 T, where it exceeds the zero field $T_N =$~2.85 K. Finally, for both field directions, the phase diagrams contain rarely observed tricritical points of second-order phase transitions.

[33]. [*Tangential Forces Govern the Viscous-Inertial Transition in Dense Frictional Suspensions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04242 "Tangential Forces Govern the Viscous-Inertial Transition in Dense Frictional Suspensions")
Sudarshan Konidena, Franco Tapia, Alireza Khodabakhshi, Elisabeth Guazzelli, Pascale Aussillous, Bernhard Vowinckel
We present particle-resolved simulations of dense frictional suspensions undergoing the viscous- inertial transition using pressure-imposed rheology. By varying the fluid viscosity, shear rate, and granular pressure, we find that the transition is independent of the packing fraction and occurs at a Stokes number of 10. Our results reveal that the shear stress exhibits a slower transition than the particle pressure, attributed to the combined effect of tangential contact and lubrication forces, as the frictional particles concurrently shift from rolling to sliding contacts. This shift is controlled by the Stokes number but also by the distance from jamming. Additionally, we examine the role of increasing inter-particle friction on the viscous-inertial transition.

[34]. [*Spin-valve effect for spin-polarized surface states in topological semimetals*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04244 "Spin-valve effect for spin-polarized surface states in topological semimetals")
A. A. Avakyants, V. D. Esin, D. Yu. Kazmin, N. N. Orlova, A. V. Timonina, N. N. Kolesnikov, E. V. Deviatov
We experimentally investigate magnetoresistance of a single GeTe-Ni junction between the $\alpha$-GeTe topological semimetal and thick nickel film at room and liquid helium temperatures. For the magnetic field parallel to the junction plane, we demonstrate characteristic spin-valve hysteresis with mirrored differential resistance $dV/dI$ peaks even at room temperature. In contrast, for normal magnetic fields spin-valve effect appears only at low temperatures. From the magnetic field anisotropy, observation of the similar effect for another topological semimetal Cd$_3$As$_2$, and strictly flat $dV/dI(H)$ magnetoresistance curves for the reference GeTe-Au junction, we connect the observed spin-valve effect with the spin-dependent scattering between the spin textures in the topological surface states and the ferromagnetic nickel electrode. For the topological semimetal $\alpha$-GeTe, room-temperature spin-valve effect allows efficient spin-to-charge conversion even at ambient conditions.

[35]. [*Realizing high-temperature superconductivity in compressed molecular-hydrogen through Li doping*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04256 "Realizing high-temperature superconductivity in compressed molecular-hydrogen through Li doping")
Ashok K. Verma, P. Modak
In this study, we explore lithium-doped stable molecular hydrogen structures by performing first-principles crystal structure searches across varying compositions in the Li-H system under high pressure. Our search reveals a cubic phase of LiH12, which shows promise as a high-temperature superconductor. Our Bader charge analysis suggests that electron transfer from Li to H atoms tunes the intra- and inter-molecular H-H distances, which are critical for the metallization of molecular hydrogen. This modulation alters the interaction between bonding and anti-bonding 1s states of hydrogen molecules. Furthermore, Li ions serve as stabilizers for the distorted H2 molecular network through ionic interactions. Numerical solutions to the fully anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations reveals that this phase could exhibit superconductivity above 300 K at a pressure of 250 GPa, a pressure value that is typically achievable using a diamond anvil cell. Detailed analysis of species-specific phonons and the Eliashberg function shows that low- and intermediate-energy phonons are crucial in promoting strong electron-phonon coupling. Thus, our study establishes lithium doping as a promising approach to induce high-temperature superconductivity in compressed molecular hydrogen without causing molecular dissociation.

[36]. [*Sign competing sources of Berry curvature and anomalous Hall conductance humps in topological ferromagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04268 "Sign competing sources of Berry curvature and anomalous Hall conductance humps in topological ferromagnets")
Wojciech Brzezicki, Carmine Autieri, Mario Cuoco
The use of Berry-phase concepts has established a strong link between the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and the topological character of the Hall currents. However, the occurrence of sign competition in the Berry curvature often hin- ders the topological origin of the observed anomalous Hall effects. Here, we study a two-dimensional topological ferromagnet with coupled spin and orbital degrees of freedom to assess the anomalous Hall effects in the presence of sign- competing sources of Berry curvature. We show that 2D itinerant topological ferromagnets described by t2g electronic states can generally lead to topological metallic bands marked by a non-zero Chern number. We find that the resulting Berry curvature at the Fermi level exhibits a characteristic anisotropic profile with a non-monotonous angular dependence when the magnetization is reversed. The sign change of the intrinsic contribution to the anomalous Hall conductance can occur together with topological transitions or be driven by the population imbalance of the topological bands. The breaking of the inversion symmetry in- troduces the orbital Rashba coupling in the system. The interplay between the orbital Rashba and sign competing sources of Berry curvature leads to anoma- lies in the anomalous Hall conductance at values of magnetic fields for which the magnetization switches its orientation. The humps in topological ferromag- nets arise when the anomalous Hall conductivity is small in absolute value and they can be detected only close to the sign-change of the AHE and far from half-filling. This study could be relevant for the family of the topological 2D ferromagnets as well as Weyl ferromagnets, and can particularly account for the variety of unconventional behaviors observed in ultrathin films of SrRuO3.

[37]. [*Critical Behavior Analysis of Pure Dipolar Triangular Lattice via Equilibrium and Non-Equilibrium Monte Carlo Simulations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04282 "Critical Behavior Analysis of Pure Dipolar Triangular Lattice via Equilibrium and Non-Equilibrium Monte Carlo Simulations")
S. Ismailzadeh, M. D. Niry
Magnetic thin films and 2D arrays of magnetic nanoparticles exhibit unique physical properties that make them valuable for a wide range of technological applications. In such systems, dipolar interactions play a crucial role in determining their physical behavior. However, due to the anisotropic and long-range nature of dipolar interactions, conventional Monte Carlo (MC) methods face challenges in investigating these systems near criticality. In this study, we examine the critical behavior of a triangular lattice of dipoles using the optimized Tomita MC algorithm tailored for dipolar interactions. We employ two independent computational approaches to estimate the critical temperature and exponents: equilibrium MC simulations with histogram reweighting and the non-equilibrium relaxation method. Notably, both approaches demonstrate that the critical exponents are very close to those of the 2D Ising universality class.

[38]. [*Magnetization-resolved density of states and quasi-first order transition in the two-dimensional random bond Ising model: an entropic sampling study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04298 "Magnetization-resolved density of states and quasi-first order transition in the two-dimensional random bond Ising model: an entropic sampling study")
Yi Liu, Ding Wang, Xin Wang, Dao-Xin Yao, Lei-Han Tang
Systems with quenched disorder possess complex energy landscapes that are challenging to explore under the conventional Monte Carlo method. In this work, we implement an efficient entropy sampling scheme for accurate computation of the entropy function in low-energy regions. The method is applied to the two-dimensional $\pm J$ random-bond Ising model, where frustration is controlled by the fraction $p$ of ferromagnetic bonds. We investigate the low-temperature paramagnetic--ferromagnetic phase boundary below the multicritical point at $T_N = 0.9530(4)$, $P_N = 0.89078(8)$, as well as the zero-temperature ferromagnetic--spin-glass transition. Finite-size scaling analysis reveals that the phase boundary for $T < T_N$ exhibits reentrant behavior. By analyzing the evolution of the magnetization-resolved density of states $g(E, M)$ and ground-state spin configurations against increasing frustration, we provide strong evidence that the zero-temperature transition is quasi-first order. Finite-size scaling conducted on the spin-glass side supports the validity of $\beta = 0$, with a correlation length exponent $\nu = 1.50(8)$. Our results provide new insights into the nature of the ferromagnetic-to-spin-glass phase transition in an extensively degenerate ground state.

[39]. [*FRET-Enhanced Singlet Fission in Pentacene Derivatives*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04334 "FRET-Enhanced Singlet Fission in Pentacene Derivatives")
Oskar Kefer, Philipp Ludwig, Benedikt Dittmar, Felix Deschler, Jan Freudenberg, Andreas Dreuw, Uwe H. F. Bunz, Tiago Buckup
Conversion of solar energy with high quantum efficiencies is a key challenge in energy technologies. Excitation energy transfer (EET) mechanisms, such as F\"orster resonance energy transfer (FRET), play a crucial role in facilitating minimal energy loss in biological light-harvesting systems by directing excitation energy to conversion centers. Inspired by this, we show that singlet fission (SF) sensitizers are multi-exciton generation centers, to which surrounding molecules funnel excitation energy via FRET. We study the impact of such EET on SF using two structurally distinct yet optically similar pentacene derivatives: a stability-enhanced ''Gel\"ander'' pentacene, and the well-studied TIPS-pentacene. Transient absorption spectroscopy reveals a $R^{6}$ dependence of the SF rate on molecular separation $R$ in binary acene:polymethylmetacrylate thin film blends, which is typical for FRET. Optimizing FRET is a promising direction for future improvements in light harvesting using SF materials, inspired by natural light-harvesting complexes.

[40]. [*Electromagnetic diffraction and bidirectional plasmon launching in partially gated 2d systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04356 "Electromagnetic diffraction and bidirectional plasmon launching in partially gated 2d systems")
Ilia Moiseenko, Egor Nikulin, Dmitry Svintsov
Partially gated two-dimensional electron systems (2DES) represent the basic building block of prospective optoelectronic devices, including electromagnetic detectors and sources. At the same time, the electrodynamic properties of such structures have been addressed only with numerical simulations. Here, we provide an exact solution of electromagnetic scattering problem at a partially gated 2DES using the Wiener-Hopf technique. We find that incident p-polarized field is enhanced in immediate vicinity of gate edge. The edge acts as a plasmonic coupler that launches bidirectional (gated and ungated) plasmons in weakly-dissipative 2DES with impedance of inductive type. Electric fields in these waves markedly exceeds the incident field, especially in the limit of small gate-2DES separation. The amplitude of the ungated wave exceeds that of gated for 2DES reactance above the free-space impedance. Both amplitudes are maximized for the 2DES reactance of the order of free space impedance timed by the ratio of free space wavelength and gate-2DES separation.

[41]. [*Charged Vortex in Superconductor*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04359 "Charged Vortex in Superconductor")
Yoonbai Kim, SeungJun Jeon, Hanwool Song
We find the charged spinless vortices in the effective field theory of a Schr\"{o}dinger type complex scalar field of Cooper pair, a U(1) gauge field of electromagnetism, and a gapless neutral scalar field of acoustic phonon. We show that regular static vortex solutions are obtained only for the nonzero critical cubic Yukawa type coupling between neutral and complex scalar fields. Since the Coulombic electric field is exactly cancelled by the phonon, the obtained charged vortices have finite energy. When the quartic self-interaction coupling of complex scalar field has the critical value, the BPS (Bogomolny-Prasad-Sommerfield) bound is saturated for multiple charged vortices of arbitrary separations and hence the borderline of type I and II superconductors is achieved in nonperturbative regime.

[42]. [*Rotation-Induced Orbital Currents in Ferro-Rotational Systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04363 "Rotation-Induced Orbital Currents in Ferro-Rotational Systems")
Daegeun Jo, Peter M. Oppeneer
Generation of orbital angular momentum has become important to effectuate new ways to address switchable magnetic devices. Here, we demonstrate the electrical generation of unconventional orbital currents in ferro-rotational systems through an intrinsic, nonrelativistic mechanism associated with an electric hexadecapole moment. These rotation-induced orbital currents are examined using tight-binding models, and we also provide first-principles calculations for the ferro-rotational material TiAu$_4$. Our findings unveil a novel pathway for generating orbital currents beyond the conventional orbital Hall effect, broadening the landscape of orbitronics research to include novel ferroic materials and higher-order electric multipoles.

[43]. [*Screening of the band gap in electrically biased bilayer graphene: From Hartree to Hartree-Fock*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04381 "Screening of the band gap in electrically biased bilayer graphene: From Hartree to Hartree-Fock")
Jack N. Engdahl, Zeb E. Krix, Oleg P. Sushkov
It is well known that a direct band gap may be opened in bilayer graphene via the application of a perpendicular electric field (bias). The bias and the chemical potential are controlled by electrostatic gating where the top and bottom gate voltages are tuned separately. The value of the band gap opened by the bias field is influenced by the self screening of the bilayer graphene. The Hartree contribution to the self screening is well known in literature, with Hartree screening significantly renormalizing the gap. In the present work we derive the Fock contribution to the self screening and demonstrate that it is equally important and in the low density regime even more important than the Hartree contribution. We calculate the Hartree-Fock screened band gap as a function of electron doping at zero temperature and also as a function of temperature at zero doping.

[44]. [*Replica exchange nested sampling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04390 "Replica exchange nested sampling")
Nico Unglert, Livia Bart\'ok P\'artay, Georg K. H. Madsen
Nested sampling (NS) has emerged as a powerful tool for exploring thermodynamic properties in materials science. However, its efficiency is often hindered by the limitations of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. In strongly multimodal landscapes, MCMC struggles to traverse energy barriers, leading to biased sampling and reduced accuracy. To address this issue, we introduce replica-exchange nested sampling (RENS), a novel enhancement that integrates replica-exchange moves into the NS framework. Inspired by Hamiltonian replica exchange methods, RENS connects independent NS simulations performed under different external conditions, facilitating ergodic sampling and significantly improving computational efficiency. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RENS using four test systems of increasing complexity: a one-dimensional toy system, periodic Lennard-Jones, the two-scale core-softened Jagla model and a machine learned interatomic potential for silicon. Our results show that RENS not only accelerates convergence but also allows the effective handling of challenging cases where independent NS fails, thereby expanding the applicability of NS to more realistic material models.

[45]. [*Advancements in Solid-State Sodium-Based Batteries: A Comprehensive Review*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04391 "Advancements in Solid-State Sodium-Based Batteries: A Comprehensive Review")
Arianna Massaro, Lorenzo Squillantini, Francesca De Giorgio, Francesca A. Scaramuzzo, Mauro Pasquali, Sergio Brutti
This manuscript explores recent advancements in solid-state sodium-based battery technology, particularly focusing on electrochemical performance and the challenges associated with developing efficient solid electrolytes. The replacement of conventional liquid electrolytes with solid-state alternatives offers numerous benefits, including enhanced safety and environmental sustainability, as solid-state systems reduce flammability and harsh chemical handling. The work emphasizes the importance of structure and interface characteristics in solid electrolytes, which play a critical role in ionic conductivity and overall battery performance. Various classes of solid electrolytes, such as sodium-based anti-perovskites and sulphide electrolytes, are examined, highlighting their unique ionic transport mechanisms and mechanical properties that facilitate stable cycling. The manuscript also discusses strategies to enhance interfacial stability between the anode and the solid electrolyte to mitigate performance degradation during battery operation. Furthermore, advancements in electrode formulations and the integration of novel materials are considered pivotal in optimizing the charging and discharging processes, thus improving the energy and power densities of sodium batteries. The outlook on the future of sodium-based solid-state batteries underscores their potential to meet emerging energy storage demands while leveraging the abundant availability of sodium compared to lithium. This comprehensive review aims to provide insights into ongoing research and prospective directions for the commercialization of solid-state sodium-based batteries, positioning them as viable alternatives in the renewable energy landscape.

[46]. [*Direct evidence of intrinsic Mott state and its layer-parity oscillation in a breathing kagome crystal down to monolayer*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04400 "Direct evidence of intrinsic Mott state and its layer-parity oscillation in a breathing kagome crystal down to monolayer")
Huanyu Liu, Wenhui Li, Zishu Zhou, Hongbin Qu, Jiaqi Zhang, Weixiong Hu, Chenhaoping Wen, Ning Wang, Hao Deng, Gang Li, Shichao Yan
We report direct spectroscopic evidence of correlation-driven Mott states in layered Nb$_3$Cl$_8$ through combining scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and dynamical mean-field theory. The Hubbard bands persist down to monolayer, providing the definitive evidence for the Mottness in Nb$_3$Cl$_8$. While the size of the Mott gap remains almost constant across all layers, a striking layer-parity-dependent oscillation emerges in the local density of states (LDOS) between even (n = 2,4,6) and odd layers (n = 1,3,5), which arises from the dimerization and correlation modulation of the obstructed atomic states, respectively. Our conclusions are supported by a critical technical advance in atomic-scale LDOS mapping for highly insulating systems. This work provides the definitive experimental verification of correlation-driven Mott ground states in Nb3Cl8 while establishing a general protocol for investigating the interplay of electronic correlation and interlayer coupling in layered insulators by using low-temperature STM technique.

[47]. [*Conduction Band Structure and Ultrafast Dynamics of Ferroelectric $\alpha$-GeTe(111)*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04418 "Conduction Band Structure and Ultrafast Dynamics of Ferroelectric $\alpha$-GeTe(111)")
Geoffroy Kremer, Laurent Nicola\"i, Fr\'ed\'eric Chassot, Julian Maklar, Christopher W. Nicholson, J. Hugo Dil, Juraj Krempask\'y, Gunther Springholz, Ralph Ernstorfer, Jan Min\'ar, Laurenz Rettig, Claude Monney
$\alpha$-GeTe(111) is a non-centrosymmetric ferroelectric (FE) material for which a significative lattice distortion combined with a strong spin-orbit interaction gives rise to giant Rashba split states in the bulk and at the surface, which have been intensively probed in the occupied valence states using static angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Nevertheless, its unoccupied conduction band structure remains unexplored, in particular the experimental determination of its electronic band gap across momentum space. Using time-resolved ARPES based on high-repetition rate and extreme ultraviolet femtosecond (fs) laser, we unveil the band structure of $\alpha$-GeTe(111) in the full Brillouin zone, both in the valence and conduction states, as well as the exploration of its out-of-equilibrium dynamics. Our work confirms the semiconducting nature of $\alpha$-GeTe(111) with a 0.85 eV indirect band gap, which provides an upper limit for comparison to density functional theory calculations. We finally reveal the dominant scattering mechanisms of photoexcited carriers during the out-of-equilibrium dynamics under fs light pulses.

[48]. [*Consistent Field Theory Across the Mott-Insulator to Superfluid Transition*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04442 "Consistent Field Theory Across the Mott-Insulator to Superfluid Transition")
Idan S. Wallerstein, Eytan Grosfeld
We employ a field-theoretical approach to analyze the Bose-Hubbard model on a lattice, with a focus on the low-energy properties across the Mott insulator (MI) to superfluid (SF) transition. Prior approaches approximated the partition function using cumulant expansions around the MI ground state, which, while accurate in the MI phase, lead to inaccuracies in the SF phase where the MI state is a false ground state. By expanding around the correct mean-field vacuum, we derive the effective field theory (EFT) governing the MI to SF transition. Through this, we reveal the underlying structure of the EFT governing the nucleation of low-energy excitations, particularly the massless and lowest massive modes, offering new insights into their emergence.

[49]. [*Revisiting the structure of epitaxial Si3N4 on AlGaN/GaN via evolutionary structure search*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04443 "Revisiting the structure of epitaxial Si3N4 on AlGaN/GaN via evolutionary structure search")
Xin Chen, Xin Luo, Peng Cui
Gallium nitride (GaN)-based devices, such as high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs), benefit from the integration of a silicon nitride (Si3N4) cap layer on the AlGaN barrier. Previous studies, relying on empirical methods and the lack of systematic structure-searching tools, suggested a defect-wurtzite (DW-Si3N4) structure for Si3N4 on AlGaN. However, this structure, while plausible, is energetically much higher compared to beta-Si3N4. In a recent experiment (Appl. Phys. Lett. 125, 122109 (2024)), we synthesized a 2 nm thick crystalline Si3N4 layer on AlGaN. This finding prompted a reexamination of its atomic configuration, given the discrepancies between the previously proposed defect-wurtzite (DW) phase and experimental observations. To address this, we employed a systematic structure search to identify a more stable configuration, which we denote as Lam-Si3N4. This structure, characterized by a quasi-two-dimensional (Lamina) structure, is approximately 60 meV/atom lower in energy than the DW-Si3N4 structure under the in-plane lattice constant constraint matching AlGaN, and provides a better match to experimental data. Furthermore, when fully relaxed (i.e., no external strain), both DW-Si3N4 and Lam-Si3N4 exhibit wide band gaps around 4~eV. However, under the imposed AlGaN lattice constant constraint, the band gap of DW-Si3N4 significantly shrinks, whereas Lam-Si3N4 retains a relatively larger gap. The mechanical and phonon anisotropy in Lam-Si3N4 may lead to distinct directional thermal conductivity and elastic behavior, which can be beneficial for high-frequency and high-power applications. These findings provide important insights into the structure and properties of in situ grown Si3N4, potentially guiding further optimization of cap layers for GaN-based devices.

[50]. [*TBA-enabled spin-coating of a percolatively connected GO nanosieve for thru-hole epitaxy: tuning GO flake stacking and coverage to control GaN nucleation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04454 "TBA-enabled spin-coating of a percolatively connected GO nanosieve for thru-hole epitaxy: tuning GO flake stacking and coverage to control GaN nucleation")
Gunhoon Beak, Changwook Dong, Minah Choi, Jieun Yang, Joonwon Lim, Chinkyo Kim
We report a spin-coating-based approach for forming a percolatively connected graphene oxide (GO) nanosieve on SiO$_2$-patterned sapphire substrates, where the addition of tetrabutylammonium (TBA) to the GO solution significantly improves the uniformity of flake coverage and modulates GaN nucleation behavior. Upon thermal annealing of GO, the resulting reduced graphene oxide (rGO) films exhibit spatially varying coverage, leading to three distinct GaN nucleation outcomes: (i) ELOG-like nucleation on exposed substrate regions, (ii) thru-hole epitaxy (THE)-like nucleation through appropriately thin areas, and (iii) complete nucleation suppression on thickly stacked zones. On spin-coated GO films without TBA, all three behaviors coexist, and undesired ELOG- and no-nucleation modes persist due to uneven coverage. Importantly, these issues cannot be resolved by simply adjusting GO flake concentration, as concentration tuning alone fails to eliminate the formation of locally bare and overly thick regions. In contrast, the addition of TBA results in a more uniform, moderately stacked rGO morphology that suppresses both ELOG- and no-nucleation modes while expanding THE-like nucleation regions. This reshaped nucleation landscape confines GaN growth to areas with engineered percolative transport. The approach offers a scalable, lithography-free route for controlling GaN epitaxy using solution-processable 2D material masks.

[51]. [*Reconfigurable Room Temperature Exchange Bias through N\'eel Order Switching in van der Waals Heterostructures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04455 "Reconfigurable Room Temperature Exchange Bias through N\'eel Order Switching in van der Waals Heterostructures")
Jicheng Wang, Shilei Ding, Bei Ding, Zhipeng Hou, Licong Peng, Yilan Jiang, Fengshan Zheng, Zhaochu Luo, Yu Ye, Jinbo Yang, Yanglong Hou, Rui Wu
Exchange bias effect plays a crucial role in modern magnetic memory technology. Recently, van der Waals magnetic materials have emerged and shown potential in spintronic devices at atomic scale. Owing to their tunable physical properties and the flexibility in fabrication, the van der Waals heterostructures offer more possibilities for investigating potential mechanisms of the exchange bias effect. However, due to low magnetic ordering temperatures for most van der Waals magnets, to establish exchange bias in van der Waals antiferromagnet/ferromagnet heterostructures at room temperature is challenging. In this study, we fabricate (Fe$_{0.56}$Co$_{0.44}$)$_{5}$GeTe$_{2}$(FCGT)/Fe$_{3}$GaTe$_{2}$(FGaT) heterostructures with magnetic ordering temperatures of each component well above room temperature to achieve a room temperature exchange bias effect. It is found that the sign and magnitude of the exchange bias field can be efficiently controlled by manipulating the N\'eel order of FCGT with magnetic field. The manipulation of N\'eel order shows significant magnetic field dependence. A strong pre-set field induces a switch in the N\'eel order of FCGT, which aligns the interfacial magnetization at the FCGT/FGaT interface, leading to robust exchange bias, as revealed by both transport measurements and macro-spin model calculations. Our findings demonstrate the intrinsic manipulation and switchable of room-temperature exchange bias in all-van der Waals heterostructures and further promote the development of novel two-dimensional spintronic devices.

[52]. [*Disordered solid to Bose-glass transition in Bose-Hubbard model with disorder and long-range interactions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04476 "Disordered solid to Bose-glass transition in Bose-Hubbard model with disorder and long-range interactions")
Kohenjit Pebam, Laxmi Angom, Bhumika Thoudam, Momin Hrangbung, Deepak Gaur, Dilip Angom
The introduction of disorder in Bose-Hubbard model gives rise to new glassy quantum phases, namely the Bose-glass (BG) and disordered solid (DS) phases. In this work, we present the rich phase diagram of interacting bosons in disordered two-dimensional optical lattice, modelled by the disordered Bose-Hubbard model. We systematically probe the effect of long-range interaction truncated to the nearest neighbors and next-nearest neighbors on the phase diagram. We investigate the zero-temperature ground-state quantum phases using the single-site Gutzwiller mean field (SGMF) theory. We also employ strong-coupling perturbative expansion to identify the nature of ground-state solid phases analytically. At sufficiently high disorder strength, we observe a quantum phase transition between the DS and BG phases. We have investigated this transition in greater detail using cluster Gutzwiller mean field theory to study the effect of inter-site correlations which is absent in the SGMF method. We have also studied this phase transition from the perspective of percolation theory.

[53]. [*Ratchet Hall Effect in Fluctuating Superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04478 "Ratchet Hall Effect in Fluctuating Superconductors")
A. V. Parafilo, V. M. Kovalev, I. G. Savenko
We propose a superconducting ratchet-induced Hall effect (RHE), characterized by the emergence of a unidirectional, rectified flux of fluctuating Cooper pairs in a two-dimensional thin film exposed to an external electromagnetic field. The RHE is a second-order response with respect to the electromagnetic field amplitude. It consists of a nonzero photocurrent due to the breaking of the system's inversion symmetry driven by the combined action of the in-plane time-dependent electric field and a spatial modulation of the critical temperature. We explore a means to control the electric current by the polarization of the external field accompanied by a non-linear Hall effect of fluctuating Cooper pairs caused by circularly polarized irradiation. Moreover, the nonlinear conductivity tensor exhibits a higher-power dependence on the reduced temperature compared to that of the conventional Aslamazov-Larkin correction (or other fluctuating second-order nonlinear responses). It results in a dramatic enhancement of the non-linear Hall response of fluctuating Cooper pairs in the vicinity of the superconducting criticality.

[54]. [*All-DNA associative polymers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04482 "All-DNA associative polymers")
Francesco Tosti Guerra, Federico Marini, Francesco Sciortino, Lorenzo Rovigatti
Associative polymers (APs) with reversible, specific interactions between ``sticker'' sites exhibit a phase behavior that depends on a delicate balance between distinct contributions controlling the binding. For highly-bonded systems, it is entropy that mostly determines if, on increasing concentration, the network forms progressively or \textit{via} a first-order transition. With the aim of introducing an experimentally-viable system tailored to test the subtle dependence of the phase behavior on the binding site topology, here we numerically investigate AP polymers made of DNA, where ``sticker'' sites made by short DNA sequences are interspersed in a flexible backbone of poly-T spacers. Due to their self-complementarity, each binding sequence can associate with another identical sticky sequence. We compare two architectures: one with a single sticker type, $(AA)_6$, and one with two distinct alternating types, $(AB)_6$. At low temperature, when most of the stickers are involved in a bond, the $(AA)_6$ system remains homogeneous, while the $(AB)_6$ system exhibits phase separation, driven primarily by entropic factors, mirroring predictions from simpler bead-spring models. Analysis of bond distributions and polymer conformations confirms that the predominantly entropic driving force behind this separation arises from the different topological constraints associated with intra- versus inter-molecular bonding. Our results establish DNA APs as a controllable, realistic platform for studying in the laboratory how the thermodynamics of associative polymer networks depends on the bonding site architecture in a clean and controlled way.

[55]. [*Accelerated escape dynamics in non-Markovian stochastic feedback*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04489 "Accelerated escape dynamics in non-Markovian stochastic feedback")
Francesco Coghi, Romain Duvezin, John S. Wettlaufer
We study the escape dynamics of a non-Markovian stochastic process with time-averaged feedback, which we model as a one-dimensional Ornstein--Uhlenbeck process wherein the drift is modified by the empirical mean of its trajectory. This process maps onto a class of self-interacting diffusions. Using weak-noise large deviation theory, we derive the most probable escape paths and quantify their likelihood via the action functional. We compute the feedback-modified Kramers rate and its inverse, which approximates the mean escape time, and show that the feedback accelerates escape by storing finite-time fluctuations thereby lowering the effective energy barrier, and shifting the optimal escape time from infinite to finite. Although we identify alternative mechanisms, such as slingshot and ballistic escape trajectories, we find that they remain sub-optimal and hence do not accelerate escape. These results show how memory feedback reshapes rare event statistics, thereby offering a mechanism to potentially control escape dynamics.

[56]. [*Low-temperature transport in high-conductivity correlated metals: a density-functional plus dynamical mean-field study of cubic perovskites*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04508 "Low-temperature transport in high-conductivity correlated metals: a density-functional plus dynamical mean-field study of cubic perovskites")
Harrison LaBollita, Jeremy Lee-Hand, Fabian B. Kugler, Lorenzo Van Mu\~noz, Sophie Beck, Alexander Hampel, Jason Kaye, Antoine Georges, Cyrus E. Dreyer
While methods based on density-functional perturbation theory have dramatically improved our understanding of electron-phonon contributions to transport in materials, methods for accurately capturing electron-electron scattering relevant to low temperatures have seen significantly less development. The case of high-conductivity, moderately correlated materials characterized by low scattering rates is particularly challenging, since exquisite numerical precision of the low-energy electronic structure is required. Recent methodological advancements to density-functional theory combined with dynamical mean-field theory (DFT+DMFT), including adaptive Brillouin-zone integration and numerically precise self-energies, enable a rigorous investigation of electron-electron scattering in such materials. In particular, these tools may be leveraged to perform a robust scattering-rate analysis on both real- and imaginary-frequency axes. Applying this methodology to a subset of ABO$_3$ perovskite oxides -- SrVO$_3$, SrMoO$_3$, PbMoO$_3$, and SrRuO$_3$ -- we demonstrate its ability to qualitatively and quantitatively describe electron-electron contributions to the temperature-dependent direct-current resistivity. This combination of numerical techniques offers fundamental insight into the role of electronic correlations in transport phenomena and provides a predictive tool for identifying materials with potential for technological applications.

[57]. [*Large-scale exponential correlations of non-affine elastic response of strongly disordered materials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04554 "Large-scale exponential correlations of non-affine elastic response of strongly disordered materials")
D. A. Conyuh, D. V. Babin, I. O. Raikov, Y. M. Beltukov
The correlation properties of non-affine elastic response in strongly disordered materials are investigated using the theory of correlated random matrices and molecular dynamics simulations. The random matrix theory shows that the divergence of the non-affine displacement field has large-scale exponentially decaying correlations. The corresponding length scale $\xi$ is determined by the strength of the disorder and can be indefinitely large, significantly exceeding the correlation length of the disorder. The rotor of the non-affine displacement field has the same length scale $\xi$ except the case of the volumetric deformation. The main theoretical dependencies are confirmed by molecular dynamics simulation of a model polystyrene in the amorphous state.

[58]. [*Nanoscale Mechanical Structures Fabricated from Silicon-on-Insulator Substrates*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04574 "Nanoscale Mechanical Structures Fabricated from Silicon-on-Insulator Substrates")
Andrew N. Cleland, Michael L. Roukes
We describe a method with which to fabricate sub-micron mechanical structures from silicon-on-insulator substrates. We believe this is the first reported method for such fabrication, and our technique allows for complex, multilayer electron beam lithography to define metallized layers and structural Si layers on these substrates. The insulating underlayer may be removed by a straightforward wet processing step, leaving suspended single crystal Si mechanical structures. We have fabricated and mechanically tested structures such as beam resonators, tuning-fork resonators, and torsional oscillators, all with smallest dimensions of 0.1-0.2 microns and fundamental resonance frequencies above 10 MHz.

[59]. [*Engineering topological exciton structures in two-dimensional semiconductors by a periodic electrostatic potential*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04597 "Engineering topological exciton structures in two-dimensional semiconductors by a periodic electrostatic potential")
Na Zhang, Wang Yao, Hongyi Yu
We propose to engineer topological exciton structures in layered transition metal dichalcogenides through hybridizing different Rydberg states, which can be induced by a periodic electrostatic potential remotely imprinted from charge distributions in adjacent layers. Topological phase diagrams are obtained for potentials with various strengths and wavelengths. We find the lowest band of the interlayer exciton can become topologically nontrivial, which exhibits a small bandwidth as well as quantum geometries well suited for realizing the bosonic fractional Chern insulator. For monolayer excitons, topological bands and in-gap helical edge states can emerge near the energy of 2p states.

[60]. [*Emergent oscillations and chaos in non-compliant microfluidic networks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00068 "Emergent oscillations and chaos in non-compliant microfluidic networks")
Yanxuan Shao, Jean-Regis Angilella, Adilson Motter
Incompressible fluids in microfluidic networks with non-rigid channels can exhibit flow rate oscillations analogous to electric current oscillations in RLC circuits. This is due to the elastic deformation of channel walls that can store and release fluid, as electric capacitors can store and release electric charges. This property is quantified through the compliance of the system, defined as the volume change relative to the pressure change. In systems with rigid walls and incompressible fluid, compliance vanishes and no oscillations can occur through this mechanism. Here, we show that not only oscillations but also chaos can emerge in the flow-rate dynamics of non-compliant microfluidic networks with incompressible fluid. Notably, these dynamics emerge spontaneously, even under time-independent driving pressures. The underlying mechanism is governed by the effect of fluid inertia, which becomes relevant at moderate Reynolds numbers observed in microfluidic systems exhibiting complex flow patterns. The results are established using a combination of direct numerical simulations and a reduced model derived from modal analysis. This approach enables us to determine the onset of oscillations, the associated bifurcations, the oscillation frequencies and amplitudes, and their dependence on the driving pressures. These findings can inspire novel studies and applications of previously unexplored oscillatory and chaotic regimes in non-compliant microfluidic systems.

[61]. [*Enabling Multireference Calculations on Multi-Metallic Systems with Graphic Processing Units*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03755 "Enabling Multireference Calculations on Multi-Metallic Systems with Graphic Processing Units")
Valay Agarawal, Rishu Khurana, Cong Liu, Matthew R. Hermes, Christopher Knight, Laura Gagliardi
Modeling multimetallic systems efficiently enables faster prediction of desirable chemical properties and design of new materials. This work describes an initial implementation for performing multireference wave function method localized active space self-consistent field (LASSCF) calculations through the use of multiple graphics processing units (GPUs) to accelerate time-to-solution. Density fitting is leveraged to reduce memory requirements, and we demonstrate the ability to fully utilize multi-GPU compute nodes. Performance improvements of 5-10x in total application runtime were observed in LASSCF calculations for multimetallic catalyst systems up to 1200 AOs and an active space of (22e,40o) using up to four NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Written with performance portability in mind, comparable performance is also observed in early runs on the Aurora exascale system using Intel Max Series GPUs.

[62]. [*Non-Gaussian Noise Magnetometry Using Local Spin Qubits*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03877 "Non-Gaussian Noise Magnetometry Using Local Spin Qubits")
Jonathan B. Curtis, Amir Yacoby, Eugene Demler
Atomic scale qubits, as may be realized in nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond, offer the opportunity to study magnetic field noise with nanometer scale spatial resolution. Using these spin qubits, one can learn a great deal about the magnetic-field noise correlations, and correspondingly the collective-mode spectra, in quantum materials and devices. However, to date these tools have been essentially restricted to studying Gaussian noise processes -- equivalent to linear-response. In this work we will show how to extend these techniques beyond the Gaussian regime and show how to unambiguously measure higher-order magnetic noise cumulants in a local, spatially resolved way. We unveil two protocols for doing this; the first uses a single spin-qubit and different dynamical decoupling sequences to extract non-Markovian and non-Gaussian spin-echo noise. The second protocol uses two-qubit coincidence measurements to study spatially non-local cumulants in the magnetic noise. We then demonstrate the utility of these protocols by considering a model of a bath of non-interacting two-level systems, as well as a model involving spatially correlated magnetic fluctuations near a second-order Ising phase transition. In both cases, we highlight how this technique can be used to measure in a real many-body system how fluctuation dynamics converge towards the central limit theorem as a function of effective bath size. We then conclude by discussing some promising applications and extensions of this method.

[63]. [*Omnidirectional vision sensors based on catadioptric systems with discrete infrared photoreceptors for swarm robotics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03920 "Omnidirectional vision sensors based on catadioptric systems with discrete infrared photoreceptors for swarm robotics")
Jose Fernando Contreras-Monsalvo, Victor Dossetti, Blanca Susana Soto-Cruz
In this work, we fabricated and studied two designs for omnidirectional vision sensors for swarm robotics, based on catadioptric systems consisting of a mirror with rotational symmetry, eight discrete infrared photodiodes and a single LED, in order to provide localization and navigation abilities for mobile robotic agents. We considered two arrangements for the photodiodes: one in which they point upward into the mirror, and one in which they point outward, perpendicular to the mirror. To determine which design offers a better field of view on the plane, as well as detection of distance and orientation between two agents, we developed a test rail with three degrees of freedom to experimentally and systematically measure the signal registered by the photodiodes of a given sensor (in a single readout) from the light emitted by another as functions of the distance and orientation. Afterwards, we processed and analyzed the experimental data to develop mathematical models for the mean response of a photodiode in each design. Finally, by numerically inverting the models, we compared the two designs in terms of their accuracy. Our results show that the design with the photodiodes pointing upward resolves better the distance, while the other resolves better the orientation of the emitting agent, both providing an omnidirectional field of view.

[64]. [*Physics-informed Neural Networks Enable High Fidelity Shear Wave Viscoelastography across Multiple organs*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03935 "Physics-informed Neural Networks Enable High Fidelity Shear Wave Viscoelastography across Multiple organs")
Ziying Yin, Yuxi Guo, Jiayi Pu, Yuxuan Jiang, Shiyu Ma, Guo-Yang Li, Yanping Cao
Tissue viscoelasticity has been recognized as a crucial biomechanical indicator for disease diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring. Conventional shear wave elastography techniques depend on dispersion analysis and face fundamental limitations in clinical scenarios. Particularly, limited wave propagation data with low signal-to-noise ratios, along with challenges in discriminating between dual dispersion sources stemming from viscoelasticity and finite tissue dimensions, pose great difficulties for extracting dispersion relation. In this study, we introduce SWVE-Net, a framework for shear wave viscoelasticity imaging based on a physics-informed neural network (PINN). SWVE-Net circumvents dispersion analysis by directly incorporating the viscoelasticity wave motion equation into the loss functions of the PINN. Finite element simulations reveal that SWVE-Net quantifies viscosity parameters within a wide range (0.15-1.5 Pa*s), even for samples just a few millimeters in size, where substantial wave reflections and dispersion occur. Ex vivo experiments demonstrate its applicability across various organs, including brain, liver, kidney, and spleen, each with distinct viscoelasticity. In in vivo human trials on breast and skeletal muscle tissues, SWVE-Net reliably assesses viscoelastic properties with standard deviation-to-mean ratios below 15%, highlighting robustness under real-world constraints. SWVE-Net overcomes the core limitations of conventional elastography and enables reliable viscoelastic characterization where traditional methods fall short. It holds promise for applications such as grading hepatic lipid accumulation, detecting myocardial infarction boundaries, and distinguishing malignant from benign tumors.

[65]. [*Trap-induced atom-ion complexes: a time-independent approach*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03939 "Trap-induced atom-ion complexes: a time-independent approach")
Zhongqi Liang, Ruiren Shi, Jes\'us P\'erez-R\'ios
A trapped ion immersed in a neutral bath shows long-lived atom-ion complexes that significantly alter its chemical properties, and, thus the ion stability. In this work, we present a general study of trapped ion-atom scattering with the ion modeled as a charge distribution defined by the spatial extent of its ground-state wavefunction. After mapping the time-dependent problem onto a time-independent framework, we investigate the role of the trap, the atomic species, atom-ion interaction, and collision energy in shaping the chaotic dynamics of the system. We find that the probability of atom-ion complex formation directly measures its chaoticity. Therefore, our results establish a clear relationship between the emergence of chaotic scattering and the presence of ion-atom complexes.

[66]. [*Quantum tunneling and anti-tunneling across entropic barriers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03948 "Quantum tunneling and anti-tunneling across entropic barriers")
Paolo Malgaretti, Francesco Petiziol, Alexander Schnell
We study the dynamics of a quantum particle in a constricted two-dimensional channel and analyze how the onset of quantum corrections impacts the (semi-)classical high-temperature behaviour, as temperature is lowered. We characterize both equilibrium and non-equilibrium (transport) properties of the system, considering the case of a narrow and disorder-free channel. Counterintuitively, we find that quantum corrections do not monotonically enhance the particle current as the temperature is lowered, as naively expected from the activation of coherent tunnelling, but they rather inhibit transport at intermediate temperatures, increasing the effective free-energy barrier. We illustrate this ``anti-tunnelling'' effect numerically by computing the non-equilibrium steady-state of a quantum master equation describing the system, and confirm it analytically by adopting the Quantum Smoluchowski limit.

[67]. [*Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier with Passive Reverse Isolation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04059 "Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier with Passive Reverse Isolation")
C. S. Kow, M. T. Bell
Traveling-wave parametric amplifiers (TWPAs) have attracted much attention for their broadband amplification and near-quantum-limited noise performance. TWPAs are non-reciprocal by nature providing gain for forward-propagating signals and transmission line losses for backward traveling waves. This intrinsic non-reciprocity is insufficient to protect sensitive quantum devices from back-action due to noise from warmer amplification stages in practical systems, and thus necessitates the need for bulky cryogenic isolators. We present a multi-stage Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier (mTWPA) that addresses this limitation by achieving passive in-band reverse isolation alongside near-quantum-limited noise performance. The multi-stage architecture consists of two, mode conversion stages and a reflectionless high-pass filter which provides the passive isolation. Experimental measurements of a prototype mTWPA demonstrated 20 dB of forward gain across a 1.6 GHz bandwidth and greater than 35 dB of reverse isolation. Noise measurements indicate performance at 1.7 times the quantum limit. This demonstrates that the increased complexity of a multi-stage TWPA design does not lead to significant added noise. The designed distribution of gain across the stages is engineered to minimize internal amplifier noise at the input, and we propose further optimization strategies in redistribution of the gain between the stages. This level of isolation effectively mitigates noise from warmer amplification stages, matching the performance of conventional isolators. The mTWPA approach offers a scalable path forward for more efficient and compact quantum circuit readout systems.

[68]. [*Spin systems as quantum field theories in inflationary universe: A study with Unruh-DeWitt detectors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04086 "Spin systems as quantum field theories in inflationary universe: A study with Unruh-DeWitt detectors")
Shunichiro Kinoshita, Keiju Murata, Daisuke Yamamoto, Ryosuke Yoshii
We propose a method to probe the thermal properties of quantum field theory (QFT) in an inflationary universe simulated by spin systems. Our previous work (arXiv:2410.07587) has demonstrated that QFT of Majorana fermions in an arbitrary two-dimensional spacetime can be mapped onto a spin system. In this study, we apply this mapping to investigate the thermal properties of an inflationary universe. An interaction between a quantum field and a detector allows one to extract information about the quantum field from the excitation probability of the detector, known as the Unruh-DeWitt detector. In an inflationary universe with Hubble constant $H$, the excitation probability of an Unruh-DeWitt detector follows a thermal distribution with temperature $H/(2\pi)$, indicating that a static observer in the inflationary universe perceives a thermal field. We consider a spin system corresponding to QFT in an inflationary universe and introduce a single spin interacting with this system as an Unruh-DeWitt detector. We demonstrate that the detector response asymptotically approaches the result of QFT with an appropriate power of the number of spin sites. Since the dynamics of spin systems can be implemented on programmable quantum simulation platforms, our study offers a concrete route toward experimentally probing the thermal properties of an inflationary universe in controlled quantum settings. This highlights the potential of quantum technologies to emulate and investigate aspects of quantum field theory in curved spacetimes.

[69]. [*Linear Analysis of Stochastic Verlet-Type Integrators for Langevin Equations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04100 "Linear Analysis of Stochastic Verlet-Type Integrators for Langevin Equations")
Niels Gr{\o}nbech-Jensen
We provide an analytical framework for analyzing the quality of stochastic Verlet-type integrators for simulating the Langevin equation. Focusing only on basic objective measures, we consider the ability of an integrator to correctly simulate characteristic configurational quantities of transport, a) diffusion on a flat surface and b) drift velocity on a tilted planar surface, as well as c) statistical sampling of a harmonic potential. For any stochastic Verlet-type integrator expressed in its configurational form, we develop closed form expressions to directly assess these three most basic quantities as a function of the applied time step. The applicability of the analysis is exemplified through twelve representative integrators developed over the past five decades, and algorithm performance is conveniently visualized through the three characteristic measures for each integrator. The GJ set of integrators stands out as the only option for correctly simulating diffusion, drift, and Boltzmann distribution in linear systems, and we therefore suggest that this general method is best suited for high quality thermodynamic simulations of nonlinear and complex systems, including for relatively high time steps compared to simulations with other integrators.

[70]. [*Measuring $\mathbb{Z}_2$ invariants in dimer models and cross-coupled ladders with a programmable photonic molecule*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04151 "Measuring $\mathbb{Z}_2$ invariants in dimer models and cross-coupled ladders with a programmable photonic molecule")
Sashank Kaushik Sridhar, Rohith Srikanth, Alexander R. Miller, Ferguson J. McComb, Avik Dutt
Topological models are characterized by a quantized topological invariant and provide a description of novel phases of matter that can exhibit localized edge states, corner modes, and chiral transport. We experimentally realize two 1-D lattices supporting symmetry-protected topology - the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) and extended SSH models using the synthetic frequency dimension of coupled fiber ring resonators. We introduce and experimentally demonstrate cascaded heterodyning as a technique for low-noise, single-shot winding number measurements through the mean chiral displacement and band structure measurements. Through our robust setup and detection techniques we can extend our capability to realizing 1-D ladder models, demonstrating a modified Creutz ladder with a staggered flux with each plaquette. This highly reconfigurable and compact fiber optics platform for Hamiltonian simulation, along with a low-noise detection scheme, provides a path forward for chip-scale realizations.

[71]. [*Normal mode analysis within relativistic massive transport*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04444 "Normal mode analysis within relativistic massive transport")
Xin Lin, Qiu-Ze Sun, Xin-Hui Wu, Jin Hu
In this paper, we address the normal mode analysis on the linearized Boltzmann equation for massive particles in the relaxation time approximation. One intriguing feature of massive transport is the coupling of the secular equations between the sound and heat channels. This coupling vanishes as the mass approaches zero. By utilizing the argument principle in complex analysis, we determine the existence condition for collective modes and find the onset transition behavior of collective modes previously observed in massless systems. We numerically determine the critical wavenumber for the existence of each mode under various values of the scaled mass. Within the range of scaled masses considered, the critical wavenumbers for the heat and shear channels decrease with increasing scaled mass, while that of the sound channel exhibits a non-monotonic dependence on the scaled mass. In addition, we analytically derive the dispersion relations for these collective modes in the long-wavelength limit. Notably, kinetic theory also incorporates collisionless dissipation effects, known as Landau damping. We find that the branch cut structure responsible for Landau damping differs significantly from the massless case: whereas the massless system features only two branch points, the massive system exhibits an infinite number of such points forming a continuous branch cut.

[72]. [*The relevance of "on" and "off" transitions in quantum pair production experiments*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04473 "The relevance of "on" and "off" transitions in quantum pair production experiments")
\'Alvaro \'Alvarez-Dom\'inguez, \'Alvaro Parra-L\'opez
Analog gravity experiments, such as those realized in Bose-Einstein condensates, often aim at simulating cosmological pair production due to the dynamical expansion of the universe. However, these experiments have a start and an end, which introduces unavoidable transitions out of and into static regimes that alter the intended expansion profile. We show that the resulting particle spectra can be overwhelmingly dominated by these transition periods, which calls for a careful interpretation of experimental outcomes. In prospective Schwinger effect experiments, by contrast, transition effects do not dominate particle production, and such a reinterpretation may not be necessary.

[73]. [*A disturbance in the force. How force fluctuations hinder dynamical friction and induce core stalling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04505 "A disturbance in the force. How force fluctuations hinder dynamical friction and induce core stalling")
Pierfrancesco Di Cintio, Bruno Marcos
Dynamical friction is an important phenomena in stellar dynamics resulting in the slowing down of a test particle upon many two-body scatters with background particles. Chandrasekhar's original formulation, developed for idealized infinite and homogeneous systems, has been found to be sufficiently accurate even in models of finite extent and radially dependent density profiles. However, in some cases $N-$body simulations evidenced a breakdown of Chandrasekhar's formalism. In particular, in the case of cored stellar systems, the analytical predictions underestimate the rate of in-fall of the test particle. Several explanations for such discrepancy have been proposed so far, in spite of this it remains unclear whether the origin is a finite N effect or an effect arising from the resonance of the orbits of the test and field particles, which is independent on $N$, such as dynamical buoyancy. Here we aim at shedding some light on this issue with tailored numerical experiments. We perform ad hoc simulations of a massive tracer initially placed on a low eccentricity orbit in spherical equilibrium models with increasing resolution. We use an $N-$body code where the self-consistent interaction among the background particles can be substituted with the effect of the static smooth potential of the system's continuum limit, so that the higher order contributions to the dynamical friction arising from the formation of a wake can be neglected if needed. We find that, contrary to what reported in the previous literature, a suppression of dynamical friction happens in both cuspy and cored models. When neglecting the interaction among field particles we observe in both cases a clear $N^{-1/2}$ scaling of the radius at which dynamical friction ceases to be effective. This hints towards a granularity-induced origin of the so-called core-stalling of the massive tracer in cored models.

[74]. [*Quantum thermodynamics and semi-definite optimization*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04514 "Quantum thermodynamics and semi-definite optimization")
Nana Liu, Michele Minervini, Dhrumil Patel, Mark M. Wilde
In quantum thermodynamics, a system is described by a Hamiltonian and a list of non-commuting charges representing conserved quantities like particle number or electric charge, and an important goal is to determine the system's minimum energy in the presence of these conserved charges. In optimization theory, a semi-definite program (SDP) involves a linear objective function optimized over the cone of positive semi-definite operators intersected with an affine space. These problems arise from differing motivations in the physics and optimization communities and are phrased using very different terminology, yet they are essentially identical mathematically. By adopting Jaynes' mindset motivated by quantum thermodynamics, we observe that minimizing free energy in the aforementioned thermodynamics problem, instead of energy, leads to an elegant solution in terms of a dual chemical potential maximization problem that is concave in the chemical potential parameters. As such, one can employ standard (stochastic) gradient ascent methods to find the optimal values of these parameters, and these methods are guaranteed to converge quickly. At low temperature, the minimum free energy provides an excellent approximation for the minimum energy. We then show how this Jaynes-inspired gradient-ascent approach can be used in both first- and second-order classical and hybrid quantum-classical algorithms for minimizing energy, and equivalently, how it can be used for solving SDPs, with guarantees on the runtimes of the algorithms. The approach discussed here is well grounded in quantum thermodynamics and, as such, provides physical motivation underpinning why algorithms published fifty years after Jaynes' seminal work, including the matrix multiplicative weights update method, the matrix exponentiated gradient update method, and their quantum algorithmic generalizations, perform well at solving SDPs.

[75]. [*Strain-Induced Charge Density Waves with Emergent Topological States in Monolayer NbSe2*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14634 "Strain-Induced Charge Density Waves with Emergent Topological States in Monolayer NbSe2")
Wei-Chi Chiu, Sougata Mardanya, Robert Markiewicz, Jouko Nieminen, Bahadur Singh, Tugrul Hakioglu, Amit Agarwal, Tay-Rong Chang, Hsin Lin, Arun Bansil
Emergence of topological states in strongly correlated systems, particularly two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal dichalcogenides, offers a platform for manipulating electronic properties in quantum materials. However, a comprehensive understanding of the intricate interplay between correlations and topology remains elusive. Here we employ first-principles modeling to reveal two distinct 2x2 charge density wave (CDW) phases in monolayer 1H-NbSe2, which become energetically favorable over the conventional 3x3 CDWs under modest biaxial tensile strain of about 1%. These strain-induced CDW phases coexist with numerous topological states characterized by Z2 topology, high mirror Chern numbers, topological nodal lines, and higher-order topological states, which we have verified rigorously by computing the topological indices and the presence of robust edge states and localized corner states. Remarkably, these topological properties emerge because of the CDW rather than a pre-existing topology in the pristine phase. These results elucidate the interplay between correlations, topology, and geometry in 2D materials and indicate that strain-induced correlation effects can be used to engineer topological states in materials with initially trivial topology. Our findings may be applied in electronics, spintronics, and other advanced quantum devices that require robust and tunable topological states.

[76]. [*Dynamics of Magnetic Skyrmions under Temperature Gradients*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.02621 "Dynamics of Magnetic Skyrmions under Temperature Gradients")
Chaofan Gong, Yan Zhou, Guoping Zhao
We expand the Zhang-Li spin-transfer torque [Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 127204 (2004)] to finite temperatures by the scattering amplitude. Considering various factors including the adiabatic and diabatic effects of electrons and magnons, entropy equivalent field, thermal dipole field, thermal activation, magnetic-anisotropy gradient, and diffusion, we answer a recent question both experimentally and theoretically controversial: Will skyrmions move to the hot or cold region under thermal gradients?

[77]. [*Topological materials with extensive flat-band surface states*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06033 "Topological materials with extensive flat-band surface states")
Protyush Nandi, Subinay Dasgupta
Materials that have zero-energy flat band states on the surface are likely to show surface superconductivity. Here we report a theoretical observation that a Hamiltonian describing a thin slab of topological nodal line semimetal, has zero energy eigenstate spanning the entire surface under certain conditions, namely (i) the hopping probability of fermions in the direction of thickness is more than that in other directions (ii) the onsite interaction should be less than some limiting value determined by the hopping probability. Our claim is substantiated by analytic and numerical approach. We also report new phase transitions in a region of parameter space and indicate that the Hamiltonian can also be realised by stacked layers described by Kitaev model on honeycomb lattice.

[78]. [*High Curie temperature in diluted magnetic semiconductors (B, Mn)X (X = N, P, As, Sb)*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.11283 "High Curie temperature in diluted magnetic semiconductors (B, Mn)X (X = N, P, As, Sb)")
Xiang Li, Jia-Wen Li, Jing-Yang You, Gang Su, Bo Gu
Doping nonmagnetic semiconductors with magnetic impurities is a feasible way to obtain diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs). It is generally accepted that for the most extensively studied DMS, (Ga, Mn)As, its highest Curie temperature T$_{\text{C}}$ was achieved at 200 K with a Mn concentration of approximately 16\% in experiments. A recent experiment reported record-breaking high electron and hole mobilities in the semiconductor BAs [\href{https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn4290}{Science 377, 437 (2022)}]. Since BAs shares the same zinc-blende structure with GaAs, here we predict four DMSs (B, Mn)X (X $=$ N, P, As, Sb) by density functional theory calculations. Using a rescaling method to diminish the overestimation of Curie temperature, our results indicate that a significantly higher T$_{\text{C}}$ in the range of 467 K to 485 K for (B, Mn)As with a Mn concentration of around 15.6\% and even higher T$_{\text{C}}$ values above the room temperature for (B, Mn)P with a Mn concentration exceeding 9.4\%. Furthermore, using the method of Ab initio Scattering and Transport (AMSET) with first-principles material parameters, we have predicted a hole mobility of 48.9 cm$^{\text{2}}$V$^{\text{-1}}$s$^{\text{-1}}$ at 300 K for (B, Mn)As with the hole concentration of about n$_{\text{h}}$ $=$ 4.2 $\times$ 10$^{\text{19}}$ cm$^{\text{-3}}$, which is about two times larger than the hole mobility at 300 K in the calculations for (Ga, Mn)As. The hole mobility of (B, Mn)As can be enhanced faster than that of (Ga, Mn)As when the hole concentration is decreased. Our findings predict the emergence of a new family of DMS, (B, Mn)X, and are expected to stimulate both experimental and theoretical studies of the DMS with possible high T$_{\text{C}}$.

[79]. [*Feature-based prediction of properties of cross-linked epoxy polymers by molecular dynamics and machine learning techniques*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07149 "Feature-based prediction of properties of cross-linked epoxy polymers by molecular dynamics and machine learning techniques")
Sindu B. S., Jan Hamaekers
Epoxy polymers are used in wide range of applications. The properties and performance of epoxy polymers depend upon various factors like the type of constituents and their proportions used and other process parameters. The conventional way of developing epoxy polymers is usually labor-intensive and may not be fully efficient, which has resulted in epoxy polymers having a limited performance range due to the use of predetermined blend combinations, compositions and development parameters. Hence, in order to experiment with more design parameters, robust and easy computational techniques need to be established. To this end, we developed and analyzed in this study a new machine learning (ML) based approach to predict the mechanical properties of epoxy polymers based on their basic structural features. The results from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been used to derive the ML model. The salient feature of our work is that for the development of epoxy polymers based on EPON-862, several new hardeners were explored in addition to the conventionally used ones. The influence of additional parameters like the proportion of curing agent used and the extent of curing on the mechanical properties of epoxy polymers were also investigated. This method can be further extended by providing the epoxy polymer with the desired properties through knowledge of the structural characteristics of its constituents. The findings of our study can thus lead toward development of efficient design methodologies for epoxy polymeric systems.

[80]. [*Geometric Foundation of Nonequilibrium Transport: A Minkowski Embedding of Markov Dynamics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11238 "Geometric Foundation of Nonequilibrium Transport: A Minkowski Embedding of Markov Dynamics")
David Andrieux
We introduce a unified framework for analyzing Markov dynamics by linking nonequilibrium thermodynamics with information geometry. Using the symmetrized Kullback-Leibler divergence, we reveal an intrinsic Minkowski structure in the parameter space that naturally separates symmetric elements, governed by kinetic activities and forces, from the antisymmetric behavior, characterized by thermodynamic currents and affinities. This formulation offers a systematic approach to probe the transport properties of Markov systems.

[81]. [*Skyrmion-vortex hybrid and spin wave solutions in superconducting ferromagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00405 "Skyrmion-vortex hybrid and spin wave solutions in superconducting ferromagnets")
Shantonu Mukherjee, Amitabha Lahiri
The coexistence of Ferromagnetism and superconductivity in so called ferromagnetic superconductors is an intriguing phenomenon which may lead to novel physical effects as well as applications. Here in this work we have explored the interplay of topological excitations, namely vortices and skyrmions, in ferromagnetic superconductors using a field theoretic description of such systems. In particular, numerical solutions for the continuous spin field compatible to a given vortex profile are determined in absence and presence of a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) term. The solutions show that the spin configuration is like a skyrmion but intertwined with the vortex structure -- the radius of the the skyrmion-like solution depends on the penetration depth and also the polarity of the skyrmion depends on the sign of the winding number. Thus our solution describes a novel topological structure -- namely a skyrmion-vortex composite. We have also determined the spin wave solutions in such systems in presence and absence of a vortex. In absence of vortex frequency and wave vector satisfy a cubic equation which leads to various interesting features. In particular, we have shown that in the low frequency regime the minimum in dispersion relation shifts from $k=0$ to a non zero $k$ value depending on the parameters. We also discuss the nature of spin wave dispersion in the $\omega \sim \Tilde{m}$ regime which shows a similar pattern in the dispersion curve. The group velocity of the spin wave would change it's sign across such a minimum which is unique to FMSC. Also, the spin wave modes around the local minimum looks like roton mode in superfluid and hence called a magnetic roton. In presence of a vortex, the spin wave amplitude is shown to vary spatially such that the profile looks like that of a N\'eel Skyrmion. Possible experimental signature of both solutions are also discussed.

[82]. [*Taming spin susceptibilities in frustrated quantum magnets: Mean-field form and approximate nature of the quantum-to-classical correspondence*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09401 "Taming spin susceptibilities in frustrated quantum magnets: Mean-field form and approximate nature of the quantum-to-classical correspondence")
Benedikt Schneider, Bj\"orn Sbierski
In frustrated magnetism, the empirically found quantum-to-classical correspondence (QCC) matches the real-space static susceptibility pattern of a quantum spin-$1/2$ model with its classical counterpart computed at a certain elevated temperature. This puzzling relation was observed via bold line diagrammatic Monte Carlo simulations in dimensions two and three. The matching was within error bars and seemed valid down to the lowest accessible temperatures $T$ about an order of magnitude smaller than the exchange coupling $J$. Here, we employ resummed spin diagrammatic perturbation theory to show analytically that the QCC breaks weakly at fourth order in $J/T$ and provide the approximate mapping between classical and quantum temperatures. Our treatment further reveals that QCC is an indication of the surprising accuracy with which static correlators can be approximated by a simple renormalized mean-field form. We illustrate this for all models discussed in the context of QCC so far, including a recent example of the $S=1$ material $\mathrm{K}_2\mathrm{Ni}_2(\mathrm{SO}_4)_3$. The success of the mean-field form is traced back to partial diagrammatic cancellations.

[83]. [*Magnetochiral anisotropy on a quantum spin Hall edge*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16023 "Magnetochiral anisotropy on a quantum spin Hall edge")
Youjian Chen, Gary Quaresima, Wenjin Zhao, Elliott Runburg, David Cobden, D. A. Pesin
We develop a theory of nonlinear low-magnetic-field magnetotransport on a helical edge of a quantum spin Hall insulator due to the edge state coupling to bulk midgap states. We focus on the part of the nonlinear I-V characteristic that is odd in the applied magnetic field, and quadratic in the applied bias voltage. This part of the I-V characteristic corresponds to the resistance of the sample being dependent on the relative orientation of the current and an external magnetic field, hence represents a type of edge magnetochiral anisotropy. We identify two mechanisms of the magnetochiral anisotropy. One is related to the Hubbard interaction on the midgap state, which leads to the dependence of the scattering characteristics on the current flowing on the edge, which results in bias-voltage-dependent resistance, or equivalently conductance, hence a nonlinear I-V. The other is related to the modification of the edge dispersion by a magnetic field, and requires nonlinearity in the edge dispersion. We compare the developed theory to the experiments on monolayer $\mathrm{WTe}_{2}$, and find good agreement with the developed theory.

[84]. [*Substrate stabilization of Jahn-Teller distortion in a single molecule*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00478 "Substrate stabilization of Jahn-Teller distortion in a single molecule")
Moritz Frankerl, Laerte L. Patera, Felix Giselbrecht, Thomas Frederiksen, Jascha Repp, Andrea Donarini
Charge-state transitions of a single Cu-phthalocyanine molecule adsorbed on an insulating layer of NaCl on Cu(111) are probed by means of alternate charging scanning tunneling microscopy. Real-space imaging of the electronic transitions reveals the Jahn-Teller distortion occurring upon formation of the first and second anionic charge states. The experimental findings are rationalized by a theoretical many-body model which highlights the crucial role played by the substrate. The latter enhances and stabilizes the intrinsic Jahn-Teller distortion of the negatively charged molecule hosting a degenerate pair of single-particle frontier orbitals. Consequently, two excess electrons are found to occupy, in the ground state, the same localized orbital, despite a larger Coulomb repulsion than the one for the competing delocalized electronic configuration. Control over the charging sequence by varying the applied bias voltage is also predicted.

[85]. [*Geometric control and memory in networks of hysteretic elements*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07804 "Geometric control and memory in networks of hysteretic elements")
Dor Shohat, Martin van Hecke
The response of driven frustrated media stems from interacting hysteretic elements. We derive explicit mappings from networks of hysteretic springs to their abstract representation as interacting hysterons. These maps reveal how the physical network controls the signs, magnitudes, symmetries, and pair-wise nature of the hysteron interactions. In addition, strong geometric nonlinearities can produce pathways that require excess hysterons or even break hysteron models. Our results pave the way for metamaterials with geometrically controlled interactions, pathways, and functionalities, and highlight fundamental limitations of abstract hysterons in modeling disordered systems.

[86]. [*F\"orster valley-orbit coupling and topological lattice of hybrid moir\'e excitons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03443 "F\"orster valley-orbit coupling and topological lattice of hybrid moir\'e excitons")
Huiyuan Zheng, Ci Li, Hongyi Yu, Wang Yao
Hybrid exciton in moir\'e superlattices of two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors inherits the electric dipole, strong moir\'e trapping, and stacking optical selection rules from its interlayer part, whereas the intralayer part is intended for enhancing optical coupling strength. Here, we show that electron-hole Coulomb exchange, or F\"orster coupling, within the intralayer component qualitatively alters the properties of moir\'e excitons, enabling their coherent hopping between moir\'e traps laterally separated over 10 nm and/or across layers, where their kinetic propagation is completely suppressed. Valley-flip hopping channels are found as significant as the valley-conserving ones, leading to rich possibilities to tailor valley-orbit-couplings and introduce non-trivial topology to the moir\'e exciton superlattice. In twisted MoTe$_2$ where hybrid moir\'e excitons feature a symmetry protection from radiative recombination, we show that F\"orster valley-orbit-coupling can give rise to a rich topological phase diagram.

[87]. [*Coherently Coupled Carrier and Phonon Dynamics in Elemental Tellurium Probed by XUV Transient Absorption*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09035 "Coherently Coupled Carrier and Phonon Dynamics in Elemental Tellurium Probed by XUV Transient Absorption")
Jonah R. Adelman, Hugo Laurell, Lauren B. Drescher, Han K. D. Le, Peidong Yang, Stephen R. Leone
The narrow bandgap semiconductor elemental tellurium (Te) has a unique electronic structure due to strong spin-orbit splitting and a lack of inversion symmetry of it's helical lattice. Using broadband extreme ultraviolet core-level transient absorption, we measure simultaneously the coherently coupled photo-induced carrier and lattice dynamics at the Te N$_{4,5}$ edge initiated by a few-cycle NIR pulse. Ultrafast excitation of carriers leads to a coherently excited A$_{\rm{1}}$ phonon oscillation and the generation of a hot carrier population distribution that oscillates in temperature, and the phonon excursion and hot carrier temperature are $\pi$ out of phase with respect to each other. The depths of modulation suggest a significant coupling between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom in Te. A long-lived shift of the absorption edge suggests an excited state of Te in a new equilibrium potential energy surface that lives on the order of the carrier recombination timescale. The observed phonon-induced oscillations of the hot carriers are supportive of a change in the metallicity, whereby Te becomes more metallic with increasing phonon-induced displacement. Additionally, near the Fermi level we observe an energy-dependent phase of the displacive excitation of the A$_{\rm{1}}$ phonon mode. The discovery of coherent coupling between the lattice and hot carriers in Te provides the basis to investigate coherent interactions between spin and orbital degrees of freedom. The results spectrally and temporally resolve the correlation between photo-excited hot carriers and coherent lattice excitations, providing insight on the optical manipulation of the Te electronic structure at high carrier densities exceeding $10^{21}\,\mathrm{cm}^{-3}$.

[88]. [*Self-passivation reduces the Fermi level pinning in the metal-semiconductor contacts*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.14220 "Self-passivation reduces the Fermi level pinning in the metal-semiconductor contacts")
Ziying Xiang, Jun-Wei Luo, Shu-Shen Li
The metal-induced gap states (MIGS) are commonly believed to cause the strong Femi level pinning (FLP) in the metal-semiconductors contacts. Here, we unravel unambiguously that the dangling bonds-induced interface states play a crucial role, even comparable with MIGS. The first-principles calculations show that metal-Ge and metal-Si contacts should possess a similar FLP strength if they adopt an identical interface bonding configuration: the reconstructed bonding configuration renders Si and Ge having pinning factors of 0.16 and 0.11, respectively, and the ideal non-reconstructed bonding configuration gives them pinning factors of 0.05 and 0, respectively. We illustrate that Si favors the reconstructed bonding configuration, and Ge favors the ideal non-reconstructed bonding configuration after metal deposition. The self-passivation of the dangling bonds substantially reduces the interface gap states to give a much weaker FLP in the metal-Si contacts than in the metal-Ge contacts. We also demonstrate that the full passivation of the interface dangling bonds can further increase the pinning factor to 0.5 by further reducing the interface gap states. These findings shed new light on alleviating the Femi level pinning to lower the contact resistance for Si and emerging materials towards advanced semiconductor technology.

[89]. [*Emergence of a Bandgap in Nano-Scale Graphite: A Computational and Experimental Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.14244 "Emergence of a Bandgap in Nano-Scale Graphite: A Computational and Experimental Study")
Sujinda Chaiyachad, Trung-Phuc Vo, Warakorn Jindata, Sirisak Singsen, Tanachat Eknapakul, Chutchawan Jaisuk, Patrick Le Fevre, Francois Bertran, Donghui Lu, Yaobo Huang, Hideki Nakajima, Watchara Liewrian, Ittipon Fongkaew, Jan Minar, Worawat Meevasana
Bandgaps in layered materials are critical for enabling functionalities such as tunable photodetection, efficient energy conversion, and nonlinear optical responses, which are essential for next-generation photonic and quantum devices. Gap engineering could form heterostructures with complementary materials like transition metal dichalcogenides or perovskites for multi-functional devices. Graphite, conventionally regarded as a gapless material, exhibits a bandgap of ~100 meV in nano-scale patterned highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), as revealed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and Raman measurements. Our state-of-the-art calculations, incorporating photoemission matrix element effects, predict this bandgap with remarkable accuracy and attribute it to mechanical distortions introduced during patterning. This work bridges theory and experiment, providing the direct evidence of a tunable bandgap in HOPG. Beyond its fundamental significance, this finding opens new possibilities for designing materials with tailored electronic properties, enabling advancements in terahertz devices and optoelectronics.

[90]. [*Two characteristic contributions to the superconducting state of 2$H$-NbSe$_2$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17357 "Two characteristic contributions to the superconducting state of 2$H$-NbSe$_2$")
A. Alshemi (Division of Synchrotron Radiation Research, Department of Physics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden), E. M. Forgan (School of Physics,Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK), A. Hiess (Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France - European Spallation Source ERIC, Lund, Sweden), R. Cubitt (Institut Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France), J. S. White (Laboratory for Neutron Scattering,Imaging, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland), K. Schmalzl (Forschungszentrum J\"ulich GmbH - JCNS at ILL, Grenoble, France), E. Blackburn (Division of Synchrotron Radiation Research, Department of Physics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden)
Multiband superconductivity arises when multiple electronic bands contribute to the formation of the superconducting state, allowing distinct pairing interactions and gap structures. Here, we present field- and temperature-dependent data on the vortex lattice structure in 2$H$-NbSe$_2$ as a contribution to the ongoing debate on the nature of the superconductivity in this material. The field-dependent data clearly show that there are two distinct superconducting bands, and the contribution of one of them to the vortex lattice signal is completely suppressed for magnetic fields above $\sim$ 0.8 T, well below $B\mathrm{_{c2}}$. By combining the temperature and field scans, we can deduce that there is a moderate degree of interband coupling. From the observed temperature dependences, we find that at low field and zero temperature, the two gaps in temperature units are 13.1 $\pm$ 0.2 and 6.5 $\pm$ 0.3 K ($\Delta_{0}$ = 1.88 and 0.94 $k\mathrm{_{B}} T\mathrm{_{c}} $); the band with the larger gap gives just under two-thirds of the superfluid density. The penetration depth extrapolated to zero field and zero temperature is 160 $\pm$ 2 nm.

[91]. [*N\'eel vector-dependent anomalous transport in altermagnetic metal CrSb*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12882 "N\'eel vector-dependent anomalous transport in altermagnetic metal CrSb")
Tianye Yu, Ijaz Shahid, Peitao Liu, Ding-Fu Shao, Xing-Qiu Chen, Yan Sun
Altermagnets are predicted to exhibit anomalous transport phenomena, such as the anomalous Hall and Nernst effects, as observed in ferromagnets but with a vanishing net magnetic moment, akin to antiferromagnets. Despite their potential, progress has been limited due to the scarcity of metallic altermagnets. Motivated by the recent discovery of the altermagnetic metal CrSb, we conducted a systematic study of its electrical and thermoelectric transport properties, using first-principles calculations. CrSb exhibits low magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy, enabling the manipulation of the N\'eel vector in CrSb films through a suitable ferromagnetic substrate. The anomalous Hall and Nernst conductivities reach their maximum when the N\'eel vector is aligned along $\frac{1}{2}$\textbf{\textit{a}}+\textbf{\textit{b}}. The origins of both conductivities were analyzed in terms of Berry curvature distribution. Our results demonstrate that CrSb provides a good platform for investigating the N\'eel vector-dependent anomalous transport in altermagnetic metals.

[92]. [*Ultrashort Carbon Nanotubes with Luminescent Color Centers are Bright NIR-II Nano-Emitters*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.08254 "Ultrashort Carbon Nanotubes with Luminescent Color Centers are Bright NIR-II Nano-Emitters")
Somen Nandi, Quentin Gresil, Benjamin P. Lambert, Finn L. Sebastian, Simon Settele, Ivo Calaresu, Juan Estaun-Panzano, Anna Lovisotto, Claire Mazzocco, Benjamin S. Flavel, Erwan Bezard, Laurent Groc, Jana Zaumseil, Laurent Cognet
In the fields of bioimaging, photonics, and quantum science, it is equally crucial to combine high brightness with nanoscale size in short-wave infrared (SWIR) emitters. However, such nano-emitters are currently lacking. Here, we report that when functionalized with luminescent color centers, ultrashort carbon nanotubes with length much shorter than 100 nm, are surprisingly bright in the near-infrared second-biological window (NIR-II) of the SWIR domain. We discuss the origin of this exceptional brightness based on the uncontrollable presence of quenching defects in dispersed carbon nanotubes. We further investigate the nonlinear photoluminescence behavior of color centers functionalized carbon nanotubes in response to varying excitation conditions, spanning from ensemble measurements to single-nanotube experiments. We discuss how this behavior influences the determination of their photoluminescence quantum yields, which can reach values as high as 20% for ultrashort ones detected at the single nanotube level. Notably, the corresponding NIR-II brightness exceeds that of well-known visible emitters, including quantum dots. After rendering them biocompatible, we demonstrate point-spread function engineering and high-resolution, 3-dimensional single-particle tracking using these bright ultrashort carbon nanotubes allowing nanoscale imaging in the NIR-II window within thick brain tissue.

[93]. [*Large frequency nonreciprocity of azimuthal spin wave modes in submicron vortex state disks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18255 "Large frequency nonreciprocity of azimuthal spin wave modes in submicron vortex state disks")
Sali Salama, Joo-Von Kim, Abdelmadjid Anane, Jean-Paul Adam
Vortex states in thin film disks host spin-wave modes that are geometrically quantized according to their radial and azimuthal indices. Previous studies have shown that hybridization between these modes and the vortex core results in a sizable frequency nonreciprocity between low-order clockwise and counterclockwise propagating azimuthal modes. Here, we present a computational study of these spin-wave modes in submicron disks in which the spatial extension of the vortex core becomes comparable to the wavelength of certain modes. In such cases, we find that the frequency nonreciprocity can be large even for higher order radial and azimuthal indices, reaching several GHz and comparable to the mode frequencies themselves.

[94]. [*A Microcanonical Inflection Point Analysis via Parametric Curves and its Relation to the Zeros of the Partition Function*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00999 "A Microcanonical Inflection Point Analysis via Parametric Curves and its Relation to the Zeros of the Partition Function")
Julio Cesar Siqueira Rocha, Rodrigo Alves Dias, Bismarck Vaz da Costa
In statistical physics, phase transitions are arguably among the most extensively studied phenomena. In the computational approach to this field, the development of algorithms capable of estimating entropy across the entire energy spectrum in a single execution has highlighted the efficacy of microcanonical inflection point analysis, while Fisher's zeros technique has re-emerged as a powerful methodology for investigating these phenomena. This paper presents an alternative protocol for analyzing phase transitions using a parameterization of entropy function in the microcanonical ensemble. We also provide a clear demonstration of the relation of the linear pattern of the Fisher's zeros on the complex inverse temperature map (a circle in the complex $x=e^{-\beta \varepsilon}$ map) with the order of the transition, showing that the latent heat is inversely related to the distance between the zeros. We study various model systems, including the Lennard-Jones cluster, the Ising, the XY, and the Zeeman models. By examining the behavior of thermodynamic quantities such as entropy and its derivatives in the microcanonical ensemble, we identify key features, such as loops and discontinuities in parametric curves, which signal phase transitions' presence and nature. This approach can facilitate the classification of phase transitions across various physical systems.

[95]. [*Fluctuations of stochastic charged cellular automata*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02509 "Fluctuations of stochastic charged cellular automata")
\v{Z}iga Krajnik, Katja Klobas, Bruno Bertini, Toma\v{z} Prosen
We obtain the exact full counting statistics of a cellular automaton with freely propagating vacancies and charged particles that are stochastically scattered or transmitted upon collision by identifying the problem as a colored stochastic six-vertex model with one inert color. Typical charge current fluctuation at vanishing net charge follow a one-parameter distribution that interpolates between the distribution of the charged single-file class in the limit of pure reflection and a Gaussian distribution in the limit of pure transmission.

[96]. [*Wave front propagation in the Active Coagulation Model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03372 "Wave front propagation in the Active Coagulation Model")
Matteo Paoluzzi
Spreading processes on top of active dynamics provide a novel theoretical framework for capturing emerging collective behavior in living systems. I consider run-and-tumble dynamics coupled with coagulation/decoagulation reactions that lead to an absorbing state phase transition. While the active dynamics does not change the location of the transition point, the relaxation toward the stationary state depends on motility parameters. Because of the competition between spreading dynamics and active motion, the system can support long-living currents whose typical time scale is a nontrivial function of motility and reaction rates. Because of this interplay between time-scales, the wave front propagation qualitatively changes from traveling to diffusive waves. Moving beyond the mean-field regime, instability at finite length scales regulates a crossover from periodic to diffusive modes. Finally, it is possible to individuate different mechanisms of pattern formation on a large time scale, ranging from the Fisher-Kolmogorov to the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation.

[97]. [*Nonlinear Terahertz electroluminescence from Dirac-Landau polaritons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07897 "Nonlinear Terahertz electroluminescence from Dirac-Landau polaritons")
B. Benhamou-Bui, C. Consejo, S. S. Krishtopenko, S. Ruffenach, C. Bray, J. Torres, J. Dzian, F. Le Mardel\'e, A. Pagot, X. Baudry, S. V. Morozov, N. N. Mikhailov, S. A. Dvoretskii, B. Jouault, P. Ballet, M. Orlita, C. Ciuti, F. Teppe
We report the observation of Dirac-Landau polaritons via THz magnetoreflectivity spectroscopy, demonstrating strong coupling between cyclotron transitions of two-dimensional Dirac fermions in HgTe quantum wells and optical cavity modes. We demonstrate efficient nonlinear electroluminescence, characterized by a strongly out-of-equilibrium polariton distribution dominated by emission from the upper polariton branches. Model calculations, based on the nonlinear dependence of the emission intensity and spectral narrowing with bias voltage, indicate a polariton occupancy per mode close to unity, with a significant contribution from stimulated polariton emission. These findings open promising prospects for the development of Dirac-Landau polariton condensates and low-threshold, tunable terahertz polariton lasers based on cyclotron emission.

[98]. [*Topological Invariants in Invasion Percolation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19100 "Topological Invariants in Invasion Percolation")
Fernando Alonso-Marroquin
Based on a graph morphology algorithm of invasion percolation, the relationship between capillary pressure and saturation during drainage is calculated. Two topological invariants are identified: The bond percolation threshold and the residual saturation. Bond percolation with trapping is employed to derive a closed-form pressure-saturation relation, expressed in terms of the pore geometry (pore throat distribution) and material parameters (contact angle and interfacial tension), as well as universal exponents and topological invariants, all connected according to scaling relations. The simulations suggest that the exponents of these scaling relations, along with the power-law relations between residual saturation and lattice size, are universal. Conversely, the self-similar relations are non-universal, and the self-similar function of the supercritical regime is governed by the coordination number of the lattice.

[99]. [*Exploring Three-Atom-Thick Gold Structures as a Benchmark for Atomic-Scale Calibration of Break-Junction Systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.00161 "Exploring Three-Atom-Thick Gold Structures as a Benchmark for Atomic-Scale Calibration of Break-Junction Systems")
J. P. Cuenca, T. de Ara, A. Martinez-Garcia, F. Guzman, C. Sabater
We present an in-depth study of electronic transport in atomic-sized gold contacts using Break-Junction (BJ) techniques under cryogenic and ambient conditions. Our experimental results, supported by classical molecular dynamics (CMD) simulations and ab initio calculations, provide compelling evidence for the formation of three-atom-thick structures in gold nanocontacts under tensile stress. These findings extend previous studies that confirmed the existence of one- and two-atom-thick chains. Beyond identifying these novel atomic configurations, we introduce a fast and robust calibration method for Break-Junction systems, leveraging the characteristic length of these structures to convert piezo displacement into absolute distance in angstroms. Our approach presents a novel and robust method for calibrating atomic distances in atomic conductor systems at both cryogenic and room temperatures. The results also enable the assessment of electrode sharpness, even at room conditions.

[100]. [*A Fluctuation Theory of Liquid-Phase Solutions: Shear Viscosity*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10303 "A Fluctuation Theory of Liquid-Phase Solutions: Shear Viscosity")
Yury A. Budkov, Nikolai N. Kalikin, Petr E. Brandyshev
The challenge of accurately describing liquids and their mixtures beyond equilibrium remains a significant concern in modern chemical physics and physical chemistry, especially regarding the calculation of transport properties in liquid-phase systems. This paper introduces a phenomenological nonequilibrium theory specifically designed for multicomponent liquid-phase solutions. Our field-theoretical framework, rooted in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, incorporates quasi-stationary concentration fluctuations that align with equilibrium liquid theory as outlined by classical density functional theory. This method serves as a phenomenological extension of the established Dean-Kawasaki stochastic density functional theory, enabling the computation of shear viscosity. We apply our approach to derive general formula for the shear viscosity in single-solute solutions. Our findings yield new results and successfully reproduce previously established results for such systems as solutions containing soft-core particles, hard spheres, one-component plasma, and near-critical solutions.

[101]. [*Enhancing Swelling Kinetics of pNIPAM Lyogels: The Role of Crosslinking, Copolymerization, and Solvent*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14134 "Enhancing Swelling Kinetics of pNIPAM Lyogels: The Role of Crosslinking, Copolymerization, and Solvent")
Kathrin Marina Eckert, Jelisa Bonsen, Anja Hajnal, Johannes Gmeiner, Jonah Hasse, Muhammad Adrian, Julian Karsten, Patrick A. Ki{\ss}ling, Alexander Penn, Bodo Fiedler, Gerrit A. Luinstra, Irina Smirnova
Stimuli-responsive lyogels are known for their ability to undergo significant macroscopic changes when exposed to external stimuli. While thermo-responsive gels, such as poly N isopropylacrylamide (pNIPAM), have been extensively studied across various applications, solvent-induced swelling has predominantly been investigated in aqueous solutions. This study explores the tailoring of lyogel formulations for future applications by controlling their solvent-induced swelling behavior, comparing both homopolymeric and semi-interpenetrating polymer networks (semi-IPNs). In contrast to most previous studies, the impact of chemical and physical crosslinking, as well as copolymer inclusion, on the swelling behavior and mechanical properties of lyogels in organic solvents is examined and compared with solvent-induced swelling kinetics measurements. The results demonstrate that increasing chemically crosslinking in homopolymers and physically crosslinking in semi-IPNs enhances mechanical stability, while improving mass transport properties and solvent exchange kinetics. However, increases degree of crosslinking results in a prolonged response time to the solvent exchange stimulus and a reduction in the overall swelling capacity of the lyogels. Furthermore, variations in solvent properties, including molecular size and diffusion rates, significantly influence the swelling kinetics, whereas smaller, faster-diffusing solvents leading to more pronounced solvent spillage effects. Our findings highlight the complex interplay between gel formulation, network structure, and solvent nature in determining the solvent-induced swelling kinetics of lyogels, providing insights into how these materials can be tailored for specific applications especially those requiring short response times and optimized mechanical properties.

[102]. [*Antiferroelectricity with metastable polar state from Kittel model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04343 "Antiferroelectricity with metastable polar state from Kittel model")
Amit Kumar Shah (Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA), Xin Li (Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA), Guodong Ren (Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA), Yu Yun (Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA), Rohan Mishra (Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA), Xiaoshan Xu (Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA, Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA)
We have revisited the Kittel model that describes antiferroelectricity (AFE) in terms of two sublattices of spontaneous polarization with antiparallel couplings. By constructing the comprehensive phase diagram including the antiferroelectric, ferroelectric, and paraelectric phases in the parameter space, we identified an AFE phase with stable antipolar states and metastable polar state (SAMP) due to the weak coupling between sublattices. We found that the metastability of the polar state in SAMP phase could lead to apparent remanent polarization, depending on the measurement timescale. This explains the observed ferroelectric behavior of orthorhombic hafnia, which is predicted to be antipolar by density functional theories.

[103]. [*Towards "on-demand" van der Waals epitaxy with hpc-driven online ensemble sampling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.05539 "Towards "on-demand" van der Waals epitaxy with hpc-driven online ensemble sampling")
Soumendu Bagchi, Ankita Biswas, Prasanna V. Balachandran, Ayana Ghosh, Panchapakesan Ganesh
Traditional approaches to achieve targeted epitaxial growth involves exploring a vast parameter space of thermodynamical and kinetic drivers (e.g., temperature, pressure, chemical potential etc). This tedious and time-consuming approach becomes particularly cumbersome to accelerate synthesis and characterization of novel materials with complex dependencies on local chemical environment, temperature and lattice-strains, specifically nanoscale heterostructures of layered 2D materials. We combine the strength of next generation supercomputers at the extreme scale, machine learning and classical molecular dynamics simulations within an adaptive real time closed-loop virtual environment steered by Bayesian optimization to enable asynchronous ensemble sampling of the synthesis space, and apply it to the recrystallization phenomena of amorphous transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) bilayer to form stack moir\'e heterostructures under various growth parameters. We show that such asynchronous ensemble sampling frameworks for materials simulations can be promising towards achieving on-demand epitaxy of van der Waals stacked moir\'e devices, paving the way towards a robust autonomous materials synthesis pipeline to enable unprecedented discovery of new functionalities.

[104]. [*Probing the Quantum Capacitance of Rydberg Transitions of Surface Electrons on Liquid Helium via Microwave Frequency Modulation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09890 "Probing the Quantum Capacitance of Rydberg Transitions of Surface Electrons on Liquid Helium via Microwave Frequency Modulation")
Asher Jennings, Ivan Grytsenko, Yiran Tian, Oleksiy Rybalko, Jun Wang, Itay Josef Barabash, Erika Kawakami
We present a method for probing the quantum capacitance associated with the Rydberg transition of surface electrons on liquid helium using radio-frequency (RF) reflectometry. Resonant microwave excitation of the Rydberg transition induces a redistribution of image charges on capacitively coupled electrodes, giving rise to a quantum capacitance originating from adiabatic state transitions and the finite curvature of the energy bands. By applying frequency-modulated resonant microwaves to drive the Rydberg transition, we systematically measured a capacitance sensitivity of 0.34~aF/$\sqrt{\mathrm{Hz}}$ for our RF reflectometry scheme. This sensitivity is sufficient to detect the Rydberg transition of a single electron, offering a scalable pathway toward qubit readout schemes based on surface electrons on helium.

[105]. [*Floquet realization of prethermal Meissner phase in a two-leg flux ladder*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11017 "Floquet realization of prethermal Meissner phase in a two-leg flux ladder")
Biswajit Paul, Tapan Mishra, K. Sengupta
We show that a periodically driven two-leg flux ladder hosting interacting hardcore bosons exhibits a prethermal Meissner phase for large drive amplitudes and at special drive frequencies. Such a prethermal Meissner phase is characterized by a finite time-averaged chiral current. We find an analytic expression of these frequencies using Floquet perturbation theory. Our analysis reveals that the presence of the prethermal Meissner phase is tied to the emergence of strong Hilbert space fragmentation in these driven ladders. We support our analytical results by numerical study of finite-size flux ladders using exact diagonalization and discuss experiments using ultracold dipolar atom platforms that may test our theory.

[106]. [*Power Transfer in Magnetoelectric Resonators: a Combined Analytical and Finite Element Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21118 "Power Transfer in Magnetoelectric Resonators: a Combined Analytical and Finite Element Study")
Emma Van Meirvenne, Frederic Vanderveken, Daniele Narducci, Bart Sor\'ee, Florin Ciubotaru, Christoph Adelmann
We present an analytical model for power transfer in a magnetoelectric film bulk acoustic resonator (FBAR) comprising a piezoelectric-magnetostrictive bilayer. The model describes the power flow between the elastic and magnetic systems, quantifying the transduction efficiency when the FBAR operates as a magnetic transducer. By applying the model to example systems using piezoelectric ScAlN and magnetostrictive CoFeB, Ni, or Terfenol-D layers, we demonstrate the potential for achieving high efficiencies in magnetoelectric transducers, rendering them ideal for efficient ferromagnetic resonance excitation. The validity of the model's assumptions is confirmed through comparison with a numerical finite element resonator model in COMSOL\texttrademark. The finite element model further enables a comprehensive study of the resonator's dynamic behavior, including transient and steady-state regimes, and the identification of resonant frequencies within the system.

[107]. [*Effective Field Theory of Superconductivity*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03370 "Effective Field Theory of Superconductivity")
Yoonbai Kim, SeungJun Jeon, Hanwool Song
A field theory of a Schr\"{o}dinger type complex scalar field of Cooper pair, a U(1) gauge field of electromagnetism, and a neutral scalar field of gapless acoustic phonon is proposed for superconductivity of s-waves. Presence of the gapless neutral scalar field is justified as low energy residual acoustic phonon degrees in the context of effective field theory. The critical coupling of quartic self-interaction of complex scalar field is computed from a 1-loop level interaction balance between the repulsion mediated by massive degree of the U(1) gauge field and the attraction mediated by massive Higgs degree, in the static limit. The obtained net attraction or repulsion in perturbative regime matches the type I or II superconductivity, respectively. We find the new critical coupling of cubic Yukawa type interaction between the neutral and complex scalar fields from another tree level interaction balance between the Coulomb repulsion mediated by massless degree of the U(1) gauge field and the attraction mediated by the gapless neutral scalar field, in the static limit. Superconducting phase is realized at or in the vicinity of this critical coupling. A huge discrepancy between the propagation speeds of photon and phonon gives a plausible explanation on low critical temperatures in conventional superconductors.

[108]. [*Computable and Faithful Lower Bound on Entanglement Cost*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10649 "Computable and Faithful Lower Bound on Entanglement Cost")
Xin Wang, Mingrui Jing, Chengkai Zhu
Quantifying the minimum entanglement needed to prepare quantum states and implement quantum processes is a key challenge in quantum information theory. In this work, we develop computable and faithful lower bounds on the entanglement cost under quantum operations that completely preserve the positivity of partial transpose (PPT operations), by introducing the generalized divergence of $k$-negativity, a generalization of logarithmic negativity. Our bounds are efficiently computable via semidefinite programming and provide non-trivial values for all states that are non-PPT (NPT), establishing their faithfulness for the resource theory of NPT entanglement. Notably, we find and affirm the irreversibility of asymptotic entanglement manipulation under PPT operations for full-rank entangled states. Furthermore, we extend our methodology to derive lower bounds on the entanglement cost of both point-to-point and bipartite quantum channels. Our bound demonstrates improvements over previously known computable bounds for a wide range of quantum states and channels. These findings push the boundaries of understanding the structure of entanglement and the fundamental limits of entanglement manipulation.

[109]. [*Non-onsite symmetries and quantum teleportation in split-index matrix product states*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15883 "Non-onsite symmetries and quantum teleportation in split-index matrix product states")
David T. Stephen
We describe a class of spin chains with new physical and computational properties. On the physical side, the spin chains give examples of symmetry-protected topological phases that are defined by non-onsite symmetries, i.e. symmetries that are not a tensor product of single-site operators. These phases can be detected by string-order parameters, but notably do not exhibit entanglement spectrum degeneracy. On the computational side, the spin chains represent a new class of states that can be used to deterministically teleport information across long distances, with the novel property that the necessary classical side processing is a non-linear function of the measurement outcomes. We also give examples of states that can serve as universal resources for measurement-based quantum computation, providing the first examples of such resources without entanglement spectrum degeneracy. The key tool in our analysis is a new kind of tensor network representation which we call split-index matrix product states (SIMPS). We develop the basic formalism of SIMPS, compare them to matrix product states, show how they are better equipped to describe certain kinds of non-onsite symmetries including anomalous symmetries, and discuss how they are also well-suited to describing quantum teleportation and constrained spin chains.

[110]. [*Scrambling in the Charging of Quantum Batteries*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10590 "Scrambling in the Charging of Quantum Batteries")
Sebasti\'an V. Romero, Yongcheng Ding, Xi Chen, Yue Ban
Exponentially fast scrambling of an initial state characterizes quantum chaotic systems. Given the importance of quickly populating higher energy levels from low-energy states in quantum battery charging protocols, this work investigates the role of quantum scrambling in quantum batteries and its effect on optimal power and charging times by means of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model, a maximally-chaotic black hole physics model that has been recently proposed as a quantum battery. We adopt a bare representation with normalized bandwidths to suppress system energy dependence. To our knowledge, this is the first in-depth exploration of quantum scrambling in the context of quantum batteries. By analyzing the dynamics of out-of-time-order correlators, our findings indicate that quantum scrambling does not necessarily lead to faster charging, despite its potential for accelerating the process.

[111]. [*Phase Diagram from Nonlinear Interaction between Superconducting Order and Density: Toward Data-Based Holographic Superconductor*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06523 "Phase Diagram from Nonlinear Interaction between Superconducting Order and Density: Toward Data-Based Holographic Superconductor")
Sejin Kim, Kyung Kiu Kim, Yunseok Seo
We address an inverse problem in modeling holographic superconductors. We focus our research on the critical temperature behavior depicted by experiments. We use a physics-informed neural network method to find a mass function $M(F^2)$, which is necessary to understand phase transition behavior. This mass function describes a nonlinear interaction between superconducting order and charge carrier density. We introduce positional embedding layers to improve the learning process in our algorithm, and the Adam optimization is used to predict the critical temperature data via holographic calculation with appropriate accuracy. Consideration of the positional embedding layers is motivated by the transformer model of natural-language processing in the artificial intelligence (AI) field. We obtain holographic models that reproduce borderlines of the normal and superconducting phases provided by actual data. Our work is the first holographic attempt to match phase transition data quantitatively obtained from experiments. Also, the present work offers a new methodology for data-based holographic models.

[112]. [*Streamlined Krylov construction and classification of ergodic Floquet systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19797 "Streamlined Krylov construction and classification of ergodic Floquet systems")
Nikita Kolganov, Dmitrii A. Trunin
We generalize Krylov construction to periodically driven (Floquet) quantum systems using the theory of orthogonal polynomials on the unit circle. Compared to other approaches, our method works faster and maps any quantum dynamics to a one-dimensional tight-binding Krylov chain, which is efficiently simulated on both classical and quantum computers. We also suggest a classification of chaotic and integrable Floquet systems based on the asymptotic behavior of Krylov chain hopping parameters (Verblunsky coefficients). We illustrate this classification with random matrix ensembles, kicked top, and kicked Ising chain.

[113]. [*The quantum relative entropy of the Schwarzschild black-hole and the area law*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09491 "The quantum relative entropy of the Schwarzschild black-hole and the area law")
Ginestra Bianconi
The area law obeyed by the thermodynamic entropy of black holes is one of the fundamental results relating gravity to statistical mechanics. In this work we provide a derivation of the area law for the quantum relative entropy of the Schwarzschild black-hole for arbitrary Schwarzschild radius. The quantum relative entropy between the metric of the manifold and the metric induced by the geometry and the matter field has been proposed in G. Bianconi "Gravity from entropy", Phys. Rev. D (2025) as the action for entropic quantum gravity leading to modified Einstein equations. The quantum relative entropy generalizes Araki entropy and treats the metrics between zero-forms, one-forms, and two-forms as quantum operators. Although the Schwarzschild metric is not an exact solution of the modified Einstein equations of the entropic quantum gravity, it is an approximate solution valid in the low coupling, small curvature limit. Here we show that the quantum relative entropy associated to the Schwarzschild metric obeys the area law for large Schwarzschild radius. We provide a full statistical mechanics interpretation of the results.

[114]. [*Transport in multifractal Kraichnan flows: from turbulence to Liouville quantum gravity*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18851 "Transport in multifractal Kraichnan flows: from turbulence to Liouville quantum gravity")
Andr\'e L. P. Considera, Simon Thalabard
We investigate the behavior of fluid trajectories in a multifractal extension of the Kraichnan model of turbulent advection. The model couples a one-dimensional, Gaussian, white-in-time random flow to a frozen-in-time Gaussian multiplicative chaos (GMC). The resulting velocity field features an interplay between the roughness exponent $\xi\in(0,2]$, controlling the correlation decay for the Gaussian component, and the intermittency parameter $\gamma \in [0,\sqrt {2}/2)$, prescribing the deviations from self-similarity. Recent numerical work by the authors suggests that such coupling induce a smoothing-by-intermittency effect, and the purpose here is to address this phenomenon theoretically. Using the theory of 1D Feller Markov processes, we characterize the phases of the two-particle separation process upon varying $\xi$ and $\gamma$, extending to a multifractal setting the stochastic/deterministic and colliding/non-colliding transitions known in the monofractal Kraichnan case. Our analysis distinguishes between two settings: quenched or annealed. In the quenched setting, the GMC realization is prescribed, and we show that the phases are governed by the most probable H\"older exponent of the multifractal velocity field. In the annealed setting, the GMC is averaged over, leading to an additional smoothing effect. Moreover, we show that the separation process exhibits structural analogies with multiplicative one-dimensional versions of the Liouville Brownian motion (LBM)--a diffusion process evolving in a random GMC landscape, originally introduced in the context of Liouville quantum gravity. In particular, both the quenched and annealed phase transitions are recovered by considering a multiplicative LBM characterized by a roughness parameter $\xi + 4\gamma^2$ and an intermittency exponent $\gamma$.

[115]. [*Wafer-Scale Characterization of Al/AlxOy/Al Josephson Junctions at Room Temperature*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16686 "Wafer-Scale Characterization of Al/AlxOy/Al Josephson Junctions at Room Temperature")
Simon J. K. Lang (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany), Ignaz Eisele (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany, Center Integrated Sensor Systems), Johannes Weber (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany), Alexandra Schewski (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany), Wilfried Lerch (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany), Rui N. Pereira (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany), Christoph Kutter (Fraunhofer Institut fuer Elektronische Mikrosysteme und Festkoerpertechnologien EMFT, Munich, Germany, Center Integrated Sensor Systems)
Josephson junctions (JJs) are the key element of many devices operating at cryogenic temperatures. Development of time-efficient wafer-scale JJ characterization for process optimization and control of JJ fabrication is essential. Such statistical characterization has to rely on room temperature techniques since cryogenic measurements typically used for JJs are too time consuming and unsuitable for wafer-scale characterization. In this work, we show that from room temperature capacitance and current-voltage measurements, with proper data analysis, we can independently obtain useful parameters of the JJs on wafer-scale, like oxide thickness, tunnel coefficient, and interfacial defect densities. Moreover, based on detailed analysis of current vs voltage characteristics, different charge transport mechanisms across the junctions can be distinguished. We exemplary demonstrate the worth of these methods by studying junctions fabricated on 200 mm wafers with an industrially scale-able concept based on subtractive processing using only CMOS compatible tools. From these studies, we find that our subtractive fabrication approach yields junctions with quite homogeneous average oxide thickness across the full wafers, with a spread of less then 3$\,$%. The analysis also revealed a variation of the tunnel coefficient with oxide thickness, pointing to a stoichiometry gradient across the junctions' oxide width. Moreover, we estimated relatively low interfacial defect densities in the range of 70 - 5000$\,$defects/cm$^2$ for our junctions and established that the density increased with decreasing oxide thickness, indicating that the wet etching process applied in the JJs fabrication for oxide thickness control leads to formation of interfacial trap state

[116]. [*Emergent random matrix universality in quantum operator dynamics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.18311 "Emergent random matrix universality in quantum operator dynamics")
Oliver Lunt, Thomas Kriecherbauer, Kenneth T-R McLaughlin, Curt von Keyserlingk
The memory function description of quantum operator dynamics involves a carefully chosen split into 'fast' and 'slow' modes. An approximate model for the fast modes can then be used to solve for Green's functions $G(z)$ of the slow modes. One common approach is to form a Krylov operator basis $\{O_m \}_{m\ge 0}$, and then approximate the dynamics restricted to the 'fast space' $\{O_m \}_{m\ge n}$ for $n\gg 1$. Denoting the fast space Green's function by $G_n (z)$, in this work we prove that $G_n (z)$ exhibits universality in the $n \to \infty$ limit, approaching different universal scaling forms in different regions of the complex $z$-plane. This universality of $G_n (z)$ is precisely analogous to the universality of eigenvalue correlations in random matrix theory (RMT). At finite $z$, we show that $G_n (z)$ approaches the Wigner semicircle law, the same as the average bulk resolvent for the Gaussian Unitary Ensemble. When $G(z)$ is the Green's function of certain hydrodynamical variables, we show that at low frequencies $G_n (z)$ is instead governed by the Bessel universality class from RMT. As an application we give a new numerical method, the spectral bootstrap, for approximating spectral functions from Lanczos coefficients. Our proof is complex analytic in nature, involving a Riemann-Hilbert problem which we solve using a steepest-descent-type method, controlled in the $n\to\infty$ limit. This proof technique assumes some regularity conditions on the spectral function, and we comment on their possible connections to the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. We are led via steepest-descent to a related Coulomb gas ensemble, and we discuss how a recent conjecture--the 'Operator Growth Hypothesis'--is linked to a confinement transition in this Coulomb gas. We then explain the implications of this criticality for the computational resources required to estimate transport coefficients.

