[1]. [*Anyon superfluid in trilayer quantum Hall systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00058 "Anyon superfluid in trilayer quantum Hall systems")
Taige Wang, Ya-Hui Zhang
Intertwining intrinsic topological order with gapless collective modes remains a central challenge in many-body physics. We show that a quantum-Hall trilayer at $\nu_{1}=\nu_{2}=\nu_{3}= \frac13$, tuned solely by the inter-layer spacing $d$, realizes this goal. Large-scale density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG) calculations and a Chern-Simons field theory analysis reveal an intermediate ``anyon-exciton condensate'' separating the familiar $\nu_{\mathrm{tot}}=1$ exciton condensate ($d \to 0$) from three decoupled Laughlin liquids ($d \to \infty$). In this phase, neutral bi-excitons condense while a $\nu=\frac23$ Laughlin topological order survives, yielding a Goldstone mode coexisting with fractionalized anyons. A Ginzburg-Landau analysis maps out the finite-temperature phase diagram. The anyon-exciton condensate can be experimentally verified through a vanishing double-counter-flow resistance and a fractional layer-resolved Hall resistivity $R_{xy}=\frac{5}{2} h/e^{2}$, both within reach of existing high-mobility trilayer devices.

[2]. [*Double descent: When do neural quantum states generalize?*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00068 "Double descent: When do neural quantum states generalize?")
M. Schuyler Moss, Alev Orfi, Christopher Roth, Anirvan M. Sengupta, Antoine Georges, Dries Sels, Anna Dawid, Agnes Valenti
Neural quantum states (NQS) provide flexible wavefunction parameterizations for numerical studies of quantum many-body physics. While inspired by deep learning, it remains unclear to what extent NQS share characteristics with neural networks used for standard machine learning tasks. We demonstrate that NQS exhibit the double descent phenomenon, a key feature of modern deep learning, where generalization worsens as network size increases before improving again in an overparameterized regime. Notably, we find the second descent to occur only for network sizes much larger than the Hilbert space dimension, indicating that NQS typically operate in an underparameterized regime, where increasing network size can degrade generalization. Our analysis reveals that the optimal network size in this regime depends on the number of unique training samples, highlighting the importance of sampling strategies. These findings suggest the need for symmetry-aware, physics-informed architecture design, rather than directly adopting machine learning heuristics.

[3]. [*Fragmented eigenstate thermalization versus robust integrability in long-range models*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00077 "Fragmented eigenstate thermalization versus robust integrability in long-range models")
Soumya Kanti Pal, Lea F Santos
Understanding the stability of integrability in many-body quantum systems is key to controlling their dynamics and predicting thermalization. While much is known about how integrability breaks down in short-range interacting systems, the corresponding picture for long-range couplings remains incomplete. Yet long-range interactions are both ubiquitous in nature and readily engineered in modern experimental platforms. Here, we show that integrability in fully connected models is either robust or extremely fragile depending on whether the perturbation is non-extensive, extensive one-body, or extensive two-body. In a finite system with short-range interactions, any of these perturbations can induce chaos when applied with finite strength. In contrast, in fully connected finite models, chaos is induced by extensive two-body perturbations, and they do so even at infinitesimal strength. In this case, chaos emerges within quasi-symmetry sectors, leading to a fragmented manifestation of the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis (ETH). This challenges previous claims of ETH violation in quantum systems with strong long-range interactions.

[4]. [*Contactless indentation of a soft boundary by a rigid particle in shear flow*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00080 "Contactless indentation of a soft boundary by a rigid particle in shear flow")
Alexander Farutin
The dynamics of a rigid particle above a fluid-fluid interface in shear flow is studied here numerically and analytically as a function of the downward force applied on the particle. It is found here that the particle goes below the equilibrium level of the interface for a strong enough downward force. Such states remain stable under flow, with a fluid film of a well-defined thickness separating the particle from the indented interface. This result contradicts the classical lubrication theory, which predicts an infinitely large downward force being necessary for the particle to approach the equilibrium level of the interface. It is found that the classical lubrication approximation is only valid in a narrow range of shear rates, which shrinks to a point when the particle approaches the equilibrium level of the interface. The gap renormalization model, proposed here, cures this limitation of the classical lubrication theory, showing quantitative agreement with the numerical results when the particle touches the equilibrium level of the interface. It is found that the gap renormalization model provides a quantitative interpretation of the recent experimental results, including the range of particle heights above the interface for which the classical lubrication approximation breaks down.

[5]. [*Switchable Exchange Bias Resulting from Correlated Domain Structures in Orthogonally Coupled Antiferromagnet/Ferromagnet van der Waals Heterostructures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00082 "Switchable Exchange Bias Resulting from Correlated Domain Structures in Orthogonally Coupled Antiferromagnet/Ferromagnet van der Waals Heterostructures")
Aditya Kumar, Sadeed Hameed, Thibaud Denneulin, Aravind Puthirath Balan, Joseph Vas, Kilian Leutner, Lei Gao, Olena Gomonay, Jairo Sinova, Rafal E. Dunin-Borkowski, Mathias Kl\"aui
Van der Waals (vdW) magnetic heterostructures offer a versatile platform for engineering interfacial spin interactions with atomic precision, enabling nontrivial spin textures and dynamic behaviors. In this work, we report robust asymmetric magnetization reversal and exchange bias in Fe3GeTe2 (FGT), driven by interlayer exchange coupling with the A-type antiferromagnet CrSBr. Despite the orthogonal magnetic anisotropies out-of-plane easy axis in FGT and in-plane in CrSBr, we observe a strong interfacial exchange interaction that gives rise to pronounced and switchable exchange bias and asymmetric switching in FGT, persisting up to the N\'eel temperature of CrSBr (132 K) as revealed by anomalous Hall effect measurements.
  We uncover the microscopic origin of this behavior through cross-sectional magnetic imaging of the domain structure using off-axis electron holography. The results reveal that the asymmetric switching and exchange bias arise from the influence of CrSBr on the domain configuration of FGT, where the in-plane antiferromagnetic state of CrSBr promotes the formation of stripe-like domain structures in FGT with circular rotation of magnetization in the cross-sectional bc plane defined by the easy axes of both FGT and CrSBr. These findings elucidate the mechanism of exchange bias in orthogonally coupled van der Waals systems and demonstrate a pathway for stabilizing three-dimensional domain structures in ferromagnets through interfacial exchange interactions.

[6]. [*Dynamical mean field theory with quantum computing*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00118 "Dynamical mean field theory with quantum computing")
Thomas Ayral
Near-term quantum processors are limited in terms of the number of qubits and gates they can afford. They nevertheless give unprecedented access to programmable quantum systems that can efficiently, although imperfectly, simulate quantum time evolutions. Dynamical mean field theory, on the other hand, maps strongly-correlated lattice models like the Hubbard model onto simpler, yet still many-body models called impurity models. Its computational bottleneck boils down to investigating the dynamics of the impurity upon addition or removal of one particle. This task is notoriously difficult for classical algorithms, which has warranted the development of specific classical algorithms called "impurity solvers" that work well in some regimes, but still struggle to reach some parameter regimes. In these lecture notes, we introduce the tools and methods of quantum computing that could be used to overcome the limitations of these classical impurity solvers, either in the long term -- with fully quantum algorithms, or in the short term -- with hybrid quantum-classical algorithms.

[7]. [*Impact of Metal Cation on Chiral Properties of 2D Halide Perovskites*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00158 "Impact of Metal Cation on Chiral Properties of 2D Halide Perovskites")
Mike Pols, Helena Boom, Geert Brocks, Sof\'ia Calero, Shuxia Tao
Chiral two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites are formed by embedding chiral organic cations in a perovskite crystal structure. The chirality arises from distortions of the 2D metal halide layers induced by the packing of these organic cations. Sn-based octahedra spontaneously distort, but it remains unclear whether this intrinsic structural instability enhances the chirality. We investigate the effect of the metal cation on structural and phonon chirality in MBA$_{2}$Sn$_{\mathrm{x}}$Pb$_{1-\mathrm{x}}$I$_{4}$ (x = 0, 1/2, and 1). Incorporating Sn does distort the metal halide octehedra, yet it only has a minor impact on the structural chirality. In contrast, the phonons in MBA$_{2}$SnI$_{4}$ are substantially more chiral than in MBA$_{2}$PbI$_{4}$, especially the in-plane acoustic modes. However, this enhanced phonon chirality does not lead to a generation of a larger angular momentum under a temperature gradient, because the contributions of different chiral phonons tend to compensate one another.

[8]. [*Atomistic Simulations Reveal the Need to Reassess Standard Thermodynamic Models of Coherent Precipitates*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00187 "Atomistic Simulations Reveal the Need to Reassess Standard Thermodynamic Models of Coherent Precipitates")
Anas Abu-Odeh, James Warren
Accurate models of precipitation kinetics are essential to control and design structural materials. These models are highly sensitive to the thermodynamic description of precipitates. We use atomistic simulations of a model Fe-Cr system to assess two commonly used assumptions in the thermodynamic modeling of coherent precipitates: that elastic effects can be neglected for systems with a small lattice misfit and that size effects can be neglected for low levels of supersaturation. We find that these assumptions cannot be maintained for an accurate description of interfacial equilibrium, even when lattice misfits are below 1 % and supersaturation values are below 1 %. Additionally, we find a surprising trend at large precipitate radii that suggests the importance of higher-order effects that are commonly neglected. The results and insights from this study highlight the need to revisit current approaches in modeling solid-state precipitation.

[9]. [*Nambu Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics I: Foundation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00207 "Nambu Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics I: Foundation")
So Katagiri, Yoshiki Matsuoka, Akio Sugamoto
We propose a novel framework of non-equilibrium thermodynamics, termed Nambu Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics (NNET), which integrates reversible dynamics governed by the Nambu bracket with irreversible dynamics driven by entropy gradients. This framework is developed axiomatically and enables the description of far-from-equilibrium systems in which entropy can transiently decrease -- a regime difficult to handle within conventional approaches such as Onsager's linear response theory, Prigogine's General Evolution Criterion (GEC), or the GENERIC framework.
  As an illustrative example, we analyze a triangular chemical reaction system. We demonstrate that, without assuming detailed balance or linearity, two geometric conserved quantities naturally emerge: one associated with cyclic symmetry in the reaction space, and another that vanishes under symmetric reaction rates. This highlights the extended descriptive power of NNET and its capacity to unify cyclic dynamics and dissipation within a covariant structure. The generalization to higher-order nonlinear systems and applications to oscillatory or spiking non-equilibrium behavior will be discussed in subsequent papers.

[10]. [*Explicit equivalence between the spectral localizer and local Chern and winding markers*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00214 "Explicit equivalence between the spectral localizer and local Chern and winding markers")
Lucien Jezequel, Jens H. Bardarson, Adolfo G. Grushin
Topological band insulators are classified using momentum-space topological invariants, such as Chern or winding numbers, when they feature translational symmetry. The lack of translation symmetry in disordered, quasicrystalline, or amorphous topological systems has motivated alternative, real-space definitions of topological invariants, including the local Chern marker and the spectral localizer invariant.
  However, the equivalence between these invariants is so far implicit. Here, we explicitly demonstrate their equivalence from a systematic perturbative expansion in powers of the spectral localizer's parameter $\kappa$. By leveraging only the Clifford algebra of the spectral localizer, we prove that Chern and winding markers emerge as leading-order terms in the expansion. It bypasses abstract topological machinery, offering a simple approach accessible to a broader physics audience.

[11]. [*Atomic Interface Engineering of Battery Current Collectors via Ion Implantation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00236 "Atomic Interface Engineering of Battery Current Collectors via Ion Implantation")
Yue Li, Xuanguang Ren, Xueting Feng, Lingcheng Kong, Fengping Luo, Yang Xu, Liu Qian, Yusheng Ye, Ziqiang Zhao, Xin Gao, Jin Zhang
Atomic interface engineering (AIE) is critical for advancing technologies in energy storage, catalysis, and microelectronics. In anode-less lithium metal batteries (ALLMBs), AIE is essential for controlling interfacial chemistry governing lithium deposition and solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formation on copper current collectors. However, native copper surfaces readily oxidize, forming electronically insulating oxides that degrade performance and obscure failure mechanisms. Here, we report a scalable ion implantation strategy to create an atomically clean and robust copper interface. By implanting copper ions into commercial foils, we simultaneously remove the native oxide and introduce subsurface vacancy clusters that act as oxygen traps, yielding an oxidation-resistant and conductive surface. Experimental characterization and multiscale simulations reveal that these engineered vacancies suppress reoxidation and guide the formation of an ultrathin Li2O-enriched solid electrolyte interphase. When applied in ALLMBs, the current collectors enable uniform lithium deposition, suppress parasitic reactions, and deliver a Coulombic efficiency of 99.0% over 400 cycles under lean electrolyte conditions. This work presents a generalizable and industry-compatible approach for stabilizing electrochemical interfaces.

[12]. [*The Quadrupole Moment of Higher-Order Topological Insulator at Finite temperature*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00277 "The Quadrupole Moment of Higher-Order Topological Insulator at Finite temperature")
Yiting Deng, Yan He
We study the higher-order topological insulators at finite temperature based on a generalized real-space quadrupole moment, which extends the ground state expectations to ensemble averages. Our study reveals that chiral symmetry alone dictates that the quadrupole moment must be quantized to two values of $0$ and $1/2$, even at finite temperature. It is found that finite temperature can induce a topological phase transition from non-trivial to trivial. Furthermore, we found that the anisotropic intra-cell hopping can lead to a reentrant topological phase transition, in which the system becomes topological again with rising temperature. This reentrant behavior is in stark contrast to the results at zero temperature. We also investigate the effects of the quasi-disorder hopping on the topology. It is found that the initially trivial system can be driven into a topological phase with strong enough disorder strength, which closely resembles the topological Anderson transition. Our work provides an example for studying the finite temperature topology of higher-order topological insulators.

[13]. [*High-fidelity electronic structure and properties of InSb: $G_0W_0$ and Bayesian-optimized hybrid functionals and DFT+$U$ approaches*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00290 "High-fidelity electronic structure and properties of InSb: $G_0W_0$ and Bayesian-optimized hybrid functionals and DFT+$U$ approaches")
Ritwik Das, Anne-Sophie Grimault-Jacquin, Fr\'ed\'eric Aniel
This study presents a refined approach to computing the electronic structure of indium antimonide (InSb) using advanced \textit{ab initio} techniques with the In and Sb $4d^{10}$ semicore electrons included in the valence states. These states are modeled using fully relativistic projector augmented waves (PAW) and optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) pseudopotentials. However, standard Kohn-Sham density-functional theory (DFT) calculations with these pseudopotentials often produce non-physical band inversions and incorrect band gaps at the $\Gamma$-point due to $5p$-$4d$ repulsion and self-interaction errors (SIE). To resolve these issues, we apply a combination of hybrid Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) exchange-correlation (XC) functionals, many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) via quasiparticle $G_0W_0$, and DFT+$U$, significantly improving the accuracy of the band structure over previous studies. A Bayesian optimization framework is used to refine key parameters, including the inverse screening length ($\mu$) and Hartree-Fock (HF) exchange fraction ($\alpha$) in HSE-based XC functionals, as well as the Hubbard $U$ parameters in DFT+$U$, leading to significantly improved band structure predictions. This approach yields highly precise band gaps, bulk moduli, effective masses, Luttinger parameters, valence bandwidth, and $4d$ band positions, achieving unprecedented agreement with experimental data. The resulting model resolves the long-standing incomplete description of InSb's electronic band structure and provides a transferable computational framework for accurate electronic structure predictions across diverse material systems, offering valuable insights for future electronic, optoelectronic, energy, and quantum applications.

[14]. [*High harmonic generation reflecting the sub-cycle evolution of the Mott transition under a mid-infrared electric field*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00296 "High harmonic generation reflecting the sub-cycle evolution of the Mott transition under a mid-infrared electric field")
Ryohei Ikeda, Yuta Murakami, Daiki Sakai, Tatsuya Miyamoto, Toshimitsu Ito, Hiroshi Okamoto
Solids in an intense laser field show high-harmonic generation (HHG), which can provide information on carrier dynamics and band structures in weakly correlated systems. In strongly correlated systems, a laser field can induce a transition between the various electronic phases formed by the entanglement of charge, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom via carrier generation. The HHG accompanying this process should contain information on the nonequilibrium electronic-state dynamics along the oscillating field - an aspect that remains unresolved to date. Here, we show that an intense mid-infrared (MIR) pulse induces a Mott insulator-metal transition in a one-dimensional cuprate, Sr2CuO3, the evolution of which is reflected by the spectral features of HHs. When the electric-field amplitude exceeds 6 MV/cm, carriers are efficiently generated and each harmonic frequency decreases from odd multiples of the MIR frequency. Dynamical mean-field theory indicates that these redshifts originate from a series of electronic-structure reconstructions in each electric-field cycle during the melting of the Mott-insulator state, which modifies the radiation phase from carrier recombination cycle-by-cycle. This phenomenon is negligible in rigid-band systems. This experimental-theoretical study confirms that HH spectroscopy research can potentially unravel the sub-cycle dynamics of nonequilibrium phase transitions in correlated materials.

[15]. [*Large phonon-drag thermopower polarity reversal in Ba-doped KTaO3*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00313 "Large phonon-drag thermopower polarity reversal in Ba-doped KTaO3")
Mohamed Nawwar, Samuel Poage, Tobias Schwaigert, Maria N. Gastiasoro, Salva Salmani-Rezaie, Darrell G. Schlom, Kaveh Ahadi, Brandi L. Wooten, Joseph P. Heremans
This study reports the observation of phonon-drag thermopower polarity reversal in Ba-doped KTaO3 thin films, mediated by electron-phonon Umklapp scattering. Epitaxial films with distinct carrier concentrations (3.7 x 10^20 cm^-3 and 4.9 x 10^19 cm^-3) were grown via molecular-beam epitaxy. In heavily doped samples, where the Fermi surface spans 80% of the Brillouin zone, the Umklapp condition is satisfied, reversing electron momentum. This manifests as a sign-reversal in the thermopower around 80 K upon cooling despite the sample having only n-type carriers. On the other hand, the lightly doped sample (4.9 x 10^19 cm^-3) exhibits only a negative thermopower down to 2 K. These results advance the understanding of Umklapp electron-phonon drag in oxides and highlight KTaO3's potential for engineering unconventional thermoelectric materials.

[16]. [*Scale dependence of segregation patterns in the filling of silos*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00318 "Scale dependence of segregation patterns in the filling of silos")
Shivakumar Athani, Benjy Marks, Fran\c{c}ois Guillard, Alistair Gillespie, Itai Einav
Size segregation in granular flows is a well-known phenomenon: laboratory experiments consistently show that large particles migrate toward silo walls during filling, while smaller particles concentrate near the center. Paradoxically, field observations in large-scale industrial silos often report the opposite pattern, challenging these findings. We demarcate these patterns through a systematic experimental study spanning a range of dimensionless numbers relevant to bidisperse granular flows in quasi-2D silos under both dry and immersed conditions, varying container geometry and fluid viscosity. Image analysis reveals that the observed patterns are governed by two key dimensionless parameters: the slenderness of the silo and the Stokes number, which encapsulates the balance between particle inertia and viscous drag. Our results demonstrate the role of fluids on segregation dynamics and provide a unified scaling framework that reconciles laboratory- and field-scale observations in air.

[17]. [*Etching-to-deposition transition in SiO$_2$/Si$_3$N$_4$ using CH$_x$F$_y$ ion-based plasma etching: An atomistic study with neural network potentials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00327 "Etching-to-deposition transition in SiO$_2$/Si$_3$N$_4$ using CH$_x$F$_y$ ion-based plasma etching: An atomistic study with neural network potentials")
Hyungmin An, Sangmin Oh, Dongheon Lee, Jae-hyeon Ko, Dongyean Oh, Changho Hong, Seungwu Han
Plasma etching, a critical process in semiconductor fabrication, utilizes hydrofluorocarbons both as etchants and as precursors for carbon film formation, where precise control over film growth is essential for achieving high SiO$_2$/Si$_3$N$_4$ selectivity and enabling atomic layer etching. In this work, we develop neural network potentials (NNPs) to gain atomistic insights into the surface evolution of SiO$_2$ and Si$_3$N$_4$ under hydrofluorocarbon ion bombardment. To efficiently sample diverse local configurations without exhaustive enumeration of ion-substrate combinations, we propose a vapor-to-surface sampling approach using high-temperature, low-density molecular dynamics simulations, supplemented with baseline reference structures. The NNPs, refined through iterative training, yield etching characteristics in MD simulations that show good agreement with experimental results. Further analysis reveals distinct mechanisms of carbon layer formation in SiO$_2$ and Si$_3$N$_4$, driven by the higher volatility of carbon-oxygen byproducts in SiO$_2$ and the suppressed formation of volatile carbon-nitrogen species in Si$_3$N$_4$. This computational framework enables quantitative predictions of atomistic surface modifications under plasma exposure and provides a foundation for integration with multiscale process modeling, offering insights into semiconductor fabrication processes.

[18]. [*Uniform electronic states and $s$-wave superconductivity in a strongly disordered high-entropy compound (RuRhPdIr)$_{0.6}$Pt$_{0.4}$Sb*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00342 "Uniform electronic states and $s$-wave superconductivity in a strongly disordered high-entropy compound (RuRhPdIr)$_{0.6}$Pt$_{0.4}$Sb")
Yufu Yamada, Shunsaku Kitagawa, Taishi Ihara, Kenji Ishida, Naoto Uematsu, Daigorou Hirai, Koshi Takenaka
High-entropy compounds, where multiple elements occupy a single crystallographic site in a highly disordered manner, challenge conventional understandings of electronic structure based on periodicity and well-defined band dispersion. Here, we report a detailed nuclear magnetic resonance study of the high-entropy superconductor (RuRhPdIr)$_{0.6}$Pt$_{0.4}$Sb, revealing a spatially homogeneous electronic environment in the normal state, in stark contrast to its crystallographically disordered lattice. The superconducting state exhibits a small but solid Hebel-Slichter coherence peak followed by a significant decrease in the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate, providing compelling evidence for fully gapped $s$-wave pairing. Our findings not only deepen the understanding of superconductivity in highly disordered quantum materials but also open a new pathway for exploring novel superconducting states in entropy-stabilized systems.

[19]. [*Multivalent linkers mediated ultra-sensitive bio-detection*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00346 "Multivalent linkers mediated ultra-sensitive bio-detection")
Xiuyang Xia, Yuhan Peng, Ran Ni
In biosensing and diagnostic applications, a key objective is to design detection systems capable of identifying targets at very low concentrations, i.e., achieving high sensitivity. Here, we propose a linker-mediated detection scheme in which the presence of target molecules (linkers) facilitates the adsorption of ligand-coated guest nanoparticles onto a receptor-coated host substrate. Through a combination of computer simulations and mean-field theory, we demonstrate that, at fixed overall binding strength, increasing the valency of linkers exponentially lowers the concentration threshold for detection. This enables the identification of targets at extremely low concentrations, which is critical for early-stage disease and pathogen diagnostics. Furthermore, superselectivity with respect to binding strength is preserved for multivalent linkers, allowing for effective discrimination between targets and non-targets. Our findings highlight multivalency engineering of linkers as a powerful strategy to dramatically enhance the sensitivity of biodetection systems.

[20]. [*Self-strain suppression of the metal-to-insulator transition in phase-change oxide devices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00347 "Self-strain suppression of the metal-to-insulator transition in phase-change oxide devices")
Nicol\`o D'Anna, Nareg Ghazikhanian, Erik S. Lamb, Edoardo Zatterin, Mingze Wan, Ashley Thorshov, Ivan K. Schuller, Oleg Shpyrko
Quantum materials exhibiting phase transitions which can be controlled through external stimuli, such as electric fields, are promising for future computing technologies beyond conventional semiconductor transistors. Devices that take advantage of structural phase transitions have inherent built-in memory, reminiscent of synapses and neurons, and are thus natural candidates for neuromorphic computing. Of particular interest are phase-change oxides, which allow for control over the metal-to-insulator transition. Here, we report X-ray nano-diffraction structural imaging of micro-devices fabricated with the archetypal phase-change material vanadium sesquioxide (V$_2$O$_3$). The devices contain a Ga ion-irradiated region where the metal-to-insulator transition critical temperature is lowered, a useful feature for controlling neuron-like spiking behavior. Results show that strain, induced by crystal lattice mismatch between the pristine and irradiated material, leads to a suppression of the metal-to-insulator-transition. Suppression occurs within the irradiated region or along its edges, depending on the defect-distribution and the size of the region. The observed self-straining effect could extend to other phase-change oxides and dominate as device dimensions are reduced and become too small to dissipate strain within the irradiated region. The findings are important for phase engineering in phase-change devices and highlight the necessity to study phase transitions at the nanoscale.

[21]. [*Extrinsic nature of the polarization in hafnia ferroelectrics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00372 "Extrinsic nature of the polarization in hafnia ferroelectrics")
Binayak Mukherjee (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology), Natalya S. Fedorova (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology), Jorge \'I\~niguez-Gonz\'alez (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, University of Luxembourg)
Hafnia and related fluorites defy our understanding of ferroelectricity, even if we restrict ourselves to the intrinsic properties of ideal crystals. Here we focus on a critical puzzle, namely, the sign of the electric polarization. Using first-principles simulations, we show that a polar hafnia layer with a fixed atomic configuration can give rise to depolarizing fields of either positive or negative sign, depending on the environment. This implies that (the sign of) the polarization in hafnia is extrinsic in nature. We explain this result and discuss its relevance to other ferroelectric families.

[22]. [*Observation and control of potential-dependent surface state formation at a semiconductor-electrolyte interface via the optical anisotropy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00382 "Observation and control of potential-dependent surface state formation at a semiconductor-electrolyte interface via the optical anisotropy")
Marco Flieg, Margot Guidat, Matthias M. May
The interface between semiconductors and ion-conducting electrolytes is characterised by charge distributions and potential drops that vary substantially with the evolution of surface states. These surface states at the very interface to the liquid can form or be passivated, depending on the applied potential between electrode and electrolyte, and hereby fundamentally impact properties such as charge transfer. Characterisation and understanding of such potential-dependent surface states with high spatial and temporal resolution is a significant challenge for the understanding and control of semiconductor-electrolyte interfaces. Here, we show that the optical anisotropy of InP(100) can be used to detect the potential-dependent formation of highly ordered surface states under operating conditions. Upon formation of a surface state in the bandgap of the semiconductor, the potential drop and hence the electric field is shifted away from the semiconductor to the Helmholtz-layer of the electrolyte. This modifies the instantaneous response of the optical anisotropy to disturbances of the applied potential. We propose an electrochemical variant of the linear electro-optical effect and our findings open a novel route for understanding these interfaces. The results show how surface states from surface reconstructions at this reactive interface can be switched on or off with the applied potential.

[23]. [*The effect of dephasing and spin-lattice relaxation during the switching processes in quantum antiferromagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00430 "The effect of dephasing and spin-lattice relaxation during the switching processes in quantum antiferromagnets")
Asliddin Khudoyberdiev, G\"otz S. Uhrig
The control of antiferromagnetic order can pave the way to large storage capacity as well as fast manipulation of stored data. Here achieving a steady-state of sublattice magnetization after switching is crucial to prevent loss of stored data. The present theoretical approach aims to obtain instantaneous stable states of the order after reorienting the N\'eel vector in open quantum antiferromagnets using time-dependent Schwinger boson mean-field theory. The Lindblad formalism is employed to couple the system to the environment. The quantum theoretical approach comprises differences in the effects of dephasing, originating from destructive interference of different wave vectors, and spin-lattice relaxation. We show that the spin-lattice relaxation results in an exponentially fast convergence to the steady-state after full ultrafast switching.

[24]. [*Gapless superconductivity from extremely dilute magnetic disorder in 2H-NbSe2-xSx*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00435 "Gapless superconductivity from extremely dilute magnetic disorder in 2H-NbSe2-xSx")
Jose Antonio Moreno, Merc\`e Roig, V\'ictor Barrena, Edwin Herrera, Alberto M. Ruiz, Samuel Ma\~nas-Valero, Ant\'on Fente, Anita Smeets, Jazm\'in Arag\'on, Yanina Fasano, Beilun Wu, Maria N. Gastiasoro, Eugenio Coronado, Jos\'e J. Baldov\'i, Brian M. Andersen, Isabel Guillam\'on, Hermann Suderow
Most superconducting materials exhibit a vanishing density of states at the Fermi level and Anderson's theorem posits that the superconducting gap is robust against nonmagnetic disorder. Although dilute magnetic impurities lead to localized in-gap states, these states typically have no bearing on the material's bulk superconducting properties. However, numerous experiments reveal a finite density of states at the Fermi level in systems with an apparently negligible number of magnetic impurities. Here, using scanning tunneling microscopy and self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes calculations, we find that gapless superconductivity emerges in 2H-NbSe2-xSx at remarkably low magnetic impurity concentrations. Furthermore, our density functional theory calculations and in-gap quasiparticle interference measurements demonstrate that the Se-S substitution significantly modifies the band structure. This modification favours nesting and dictates the in-gap scattering for x>0, in stark contrast to the dominant charge density wave interactions in pure 2H-NbSe2. Our findings reveal an unusual superconducting response to disorder and highlight the importance of incorporating material-specific band structures in the understanding of a superconductor's response to even very low concentrations of magnetic impurities.

[25]. [*Precision high-speed quantum logic with holes on a natural silicon foundry platform*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00446 "Precision high-speed quantum logic with holes on a natural silicon foundry platform")
Isaac Vorreiter, Jonathan Y. Huang, Scott D. Liles, Joe Hillier, Ruoyu Li, Bart Raes, Stefan Kubicek, Julien Jussot, Sofie Beyne, Clement Godfrin, Sugandha Sharma, Danny Wan, Nard Dumoulin Stuyck, Will Gilbert, Chih Hwan Yang, Andrew S. Dzurak, Kristiaan De Greve, Alexander R. Hamilton
Silicon spin qubits in gate-defined quantum dots leverage established semiconductor infrastructure and offer a scalable path toward transformative quantum technologies. Holes spins in silicon offer compact all-electrical control, whilst retaining all the salient features of a quantum dot qubit architecture. However, silicon hole spin qubits are not as advanced as electrons, due to increased susceptibility to disorder and more complex spin physics. Here we demonstrate single-qubit gate fidelities up to 99.8% and a two-qubit gate quality factor of 240, indicating a physical fidelity limit of 99.7%. These results represent the highest performance reported in natural silicon to date, made possible by fast qubit control, exchange pulsing, and industrial-grade fabrication. Notably, we achieve these results in a near-identical device as used for highly reproducible, high-fidelity electron spin qubits. With isotopic purification and device-level optimisations in the future, our hole spin qubits are poised to unlock a new operation regime for quantum CMOS architectures.

[26]. [*Hybrid magnon -- Nambu-Goldstone excitations in topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator thin-film heterostructures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00460 "Hybrid magnon -- Nambu-Goldstone excitations in topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator thin-film heterostructures")
T. Karabassov, I. V. Bobkova, A. M. Bobkov, A. S. Vasenko, A. A. Golubov
We address a previously unexplored type of dynamical proximity effect that occurs in s-wave topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator (TS/FI) heterostructures. It is predicted that magnons in the FI and the Nambu-Goldstone (NG) collective superconducting phase mode in the TS are coupled, forming composite magnon-NG excitations. The mechanism of this coupling is associated with the complete spin-momentum locking of electrons in the helical surface state of the TS. The strength of the magnon-NG coupling is strongly anisotropic with respect to the mutual orientation of the magnon wave vector and the equilibrium magnetization of the FI. This effect provides a mechanism for the interconversion of spin signals and the spinless signals carried by collective superconducting excitations, thereby giving new impetus to the development of superconducting spintronics.

[27]. [*Quantum Geometry Phenomena in Condensed Matter Systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00469 "Quantum Geometry Phenomena in Condensed Matter Systems")
Anyuan Gao, Naoto Nagaosa, Ni Ni, Su-Yang Xu
Quantum geometry, which describes the geometry of Bloch wavefunctions in solids, has become a cornerstone of modern quantum condensed matter physics. The quantum geometrical tensor encodes this geometry through two fundamental components: the quantum metric (real part) and the Berry curvature (imaginary part). While the Berry curvature gained prominence through its manifestation in the intrinsic anomalous Hall effect, recent advances have revealed equally significant effects arising from the quantum metric. This includes its signatures in nonlinear transport, superfluid density of flat-band superconductors, and nonlinear optical responses. These advances underscore how quantum geometry is reshaping our understanding of condensed matter systems, with far-reaching implications for future technologies. In this review, we survey recent progress in the field, focusing on both foundational concepts and emergent phenomena in transport and optics-with particular emphasis on the pivotal role of the quantum metric.

[28]. [*The Bose-Hubbard polaron from weak to strong coupling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00486 "The Bose-Hubbard polaron from weak to strong coupling")
Tom Hartweg, Tanul Gupta, Guido Pupillo
We investigate the zero-temperature properties of a mobile impurity immersed in a bath of bosonic particles confined to a square lattice. We analyze the regimes of attractive and repulsive coupling between the impurity and the bath particles for different strengths of boson-boson interactions in the bath, using exact large-scale quantum Monte-Carlo simulations in the grand canonical ensemble. For weak coupling, the polaron mass ratio is found to decrease around the Mott insulator (MI) to superfluid (SF) transition of the bath, as predicted by recent theory, confirming the possible use of the impurity as a probe for the transition. For strong coupling in the MI regime, instead, the impurity is found to modify the bath density by binding to an extra bath particle or a hole, depending on the sign of the polaron-bath interactions. While the binding prevent the aforementioned use of the polaron mass ratio as an MI-SF transition probe, we show that it can be used instead as a probe of the binding itself. Our exact numerical results provide a benchmark for comparing lattice Bose polaron theories and are relevant for experiments with cold atoms trapped in optical lattices, where the presence of a confining harmonic potential can be modeled by a slowly varying local chemical potential.

[29]. [*Theory of hybrid collective excitations in topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator heterostructures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00499 "Theory of hybrid collective excitations in topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator heterostructures")
T. Karabassov, I. V. Bobkova, A. M. Bobkov, A. S. Vasenko, A. A. Golubov
We develop a linear response theory for the dynamical proximity effect in topological superconductor/ferromagnetic insulator (TS/FI) hybrid structures. Our approach combines the nonequilibrium quasiclassical Keldysh-Usadel equations for the electronic Green's functions in the TS with the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation governing the magnetization dynamics in the FI. Within this framework, we study the proximity-induced coupling between magnons and superconducting collective excitations. We find that the spin-momentum locking intrinsic to the surface state of the TS leads to a hybridization between the superconducting Nambu-Goldstone (phase) collective mode and magnons, resulting in the emergence of composite magnon-Nambu-Goldstone excitations. The dependence of the coupling strength on relevant physical parameters is analyzed both analytically and numerically. In contrast, we show that the Higgs (amplitude) mode does not couple to magnons at linear order and therefore does not participate in the formation of hybrid collective excitations.

[30]. [*Localized states and skin effect around non-Hermitian impurities in tight-binding models*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00519 "Localized states and skin effect around non-Hermitian impurities in tight-binding models")
Bal\'azs Het\'enyi, Bal\'azs D\'ora
We use the generalized Bloch theorem formalism of Alase {\it et al.} [{\it Phys. Rev. Lett.} {\bf 117} 076804 (2016)] to analyze simple one-dimensional tight-binding lattice systems connected by Hermitian bonds (all with the same hopping parameter $t$), but containing one bond impurity which can be either Hermitian or non-Hermitian. We calculate the band structure, the bulk-boundary correspondence indicator ($D_L(\epsilon)$) and analyze the eigenvalues of the lattice translation operator ($z$), for each eigenstate. From the $z$ values the generalized Brillouin zone can be reconstructed. If the impurity is Hermitian (and $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetric), we find a parameter regime in which two localized edge states separate from the tight-binding band. We then simulate a non-Hermitian impurity by keeping hopping in one direction of the bond impurity the same as the rest of the tight-binding system, and varying only its reciprocal. Again, we find a region with localized edge states, but in this case the energy eigenvalues are purely imaginary. We also find that in this case the two zero energy eigenvectors coalesce, hence this system is an exceptional line. We then perform an interpolative scan between the above two scenarios and find that there is an intermediate region exhibiting a non-Hermitian skin effect. In this region a macroscopic fraction of states acquire complex energy eigenvalues and exhibit localization towards the impurity. Our numerical results are supported by a detailed analysis of the solutions of the boundary/impurity equation.

[31]. [*Wave-mixing cathodoluminescence microscopy of low-frequency excitations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00560 "Wave-mixing cathodoluminescence microscopy of low-frequency excitations")
Leila Prelat, Eduardo J. C. Dias, F. Javier Garc\'ia de Abajo
Nonlinear optical phenomena such as parametric amplification and frequency conversion are typically driven by external optical fields. Free electrons can also act as electromagnetic sources, offering unmatched spatial precision. Combining optical and electron-induced fields via the nonlinear response of material structures therefore holds potential for revealing new physical phenomena and enabling disruptive applications. Here, we theoretically investigate wave mixing between external light and the evanescent fields of free electrons, giving rise to inelastic photon scattering mediated by the second-order nonlinear response of a specimen. Specifically, an incident photon may be blue- or red-shifted, while the passing electron correspondingly loses or gains energy. These processes are strongly enhanced when the frequency shift matches an optical resonance of the specimen. We present a general theoretical framework to quantify the photon conversion probability and demonstrate its application by revealing far-infrared vibrational fingerprints of retinal using only visible light. Beyond its fundamental interest, this phenomenon offers a practical approach for spatially mapping low-frequency excitations with nanometer resolution using visible photon energies and existing electron microscopes.

[32]. [*A More Convex Ising Formulation of Max-3-Cut Using Higher-Order Spin Interactions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00565 "A More Convex Ising Formulation of Max-3-Cut Using Higher-Order Spin Interactions")
Robbe De Prins, Guy Van der Sande, Peter Bienstman, Thomas Van Vaerenbergh
Many combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) are naturally expressed using variables that take on more than two discrete values. To solve such problems using Ising machines (IMs) - specialized analog or digital devices designed to solve COPs efficiently - these multi-valued integers must be encoded using binary spin variables. A common approach is one-hot encoding, where each variable is represented by a group of spins constrained so that exactly one spin is in the "up" state. However, this encoding introduces energy barriers: changing an integer's value requires flipping two spins and passing through an invalid intermediate state. This creates rugged energy landscapes that may hinder optimization. We propose a higher-order Ising formulation for Max-3-Cut, which is the smallest fundamental COP with multi-valued integer variables. Our formulation preserves valid configurations under single-spin updates. The resulting energy landscapes are smoother, and we show that this remains true even when the binary variables are relaxed to continuous values, making it well-suited for analog IMs as well. Benchmarking on such an IM, we find that the higher-order formulation leads to significantly faster solutions than the Ising baseline. Interestingly, we find that an empirical rescaling of some terms in the Ising formulation - a heuristic proposed in prior work - approaches the performance of the higher-order Ising formulation, underscoring the importance of empirical parameter tuning in COP encodings.

[33]. [*Triplet correlations in superconductor/antiferromagnet heterostructures: dependence on type of antiferromagnetic ordering*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00566 "Triplet correlations in superconductor/antiferromagnet heterostructures: dependence on type of antiferromagnetic ordering")
G. A. Bobkov, V. A. Bobkov, I. V. Bobkova, A. M. Bobkov, A. A. Golubov
In recent years, a number of studies have predicted the emergence of a nontrivial proximity effect in superconductor/antiferromagnet (S/AF) heterostructures. This effect is of considerable interest for the efficient integration of antiferromagnetic materials into the fields of superconducting spintronics and electronics. A key element of this proximity effect is the Neel triplet correlations, initially predicted for S/AF heterostructures with checkerboard G-type antiferromagnetic ordering. However, various forms of antiferromagnetic ordering exist, and an important open question concerns the generalization of these results to such cases. In this paper, we develop a theory of the proximity effect in S/AF heterostructures with arbitrary two-sublattice antiferromagnetic ordering, aiming to clarify which antiferromagnets are capable of inducing triplet correlations and what structure these correlations may exhibit. We show that, in S/AF heterostructures with collinear compensated antiferromagnets, the dominant superconducting triplet correlations are of the checkerboard Neel type, as originally predicted for G-type antiferromagnets. In contrast, layered Neel triplet correlations, although potentially generated by layered antiferromagnets, are significantly weaker. Consequently, in S/AF heterostructures with layered antiferromagnetic ordering, the proximity-induced triplet correlations may exhibit either a checkerboard Neel or a conventional ferromagnetic structure, depending on the specific antiferromagnet and its orientation relative to the S/AF interface.

[34]. [*Low-Energy Boundary-State Emergence and Delocalization in Finite-sized Mosaic Wannier-Stark Lattices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00569 "Low-Energy Boundary-State Emergence and Delocalization in Finite-sized Mosaic Wannier-Stark Lattices")
Yi Kang, Zhenjia Yu, Xiumei Wang, Xingping Zhou
The mosaic Wannier Stark lattice has gained increasing prominence as a disorder free system exhibiting unconventional localization behavior induced by spatially periodic Stark potentials. In the infinite size limit, exact spectral analysis reveals an almost pure point spectrum. There is no true mobility edge, except for (M 1) isolated extended states, which are accompanied by weakly localized modes with diverging localization lengths. Motivated by this spectral structure, we investigate the mosaic Wannier Stark model under finite-size. In such systems, additional low energy boundary localized states emerge due to boundary residuals when the system length is not commensurate with the modulation period. These states are effectively distinguished and identified using the inverse participation ratio (IPR) and spatial expectation values. To explore their response to non-Hermitian perturbations, complex on site potentials are introduced to simulate gain and loss. As the non-Hermitian strength increases, only the weakly localized states undergo progressive delocalization, exhibiting a smooth crossover from localization to spatial extension.

[35]. [*Amortized Clustering Assistant Classification of Anomalous Hybrid Floquet Modes in a Periodically Driven non-Hermitian Lattice*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00571 "Amortized Clustering Assistant Classification of Anomalous Hybrid Floquet Modes in a Periodically Driven non-Hermitian Lattice")
Yifei Xia, Xiumei Wang, Yali Li, Xingping Zhou
The interplay between Floquet periodically driving and non-Hermiticity could bring about intriguing novel phenomena with anomalous Floquet topological phases of a finite-size, tight-binding lattice model. How to efficiently investigate on quasi-energy and eigenfield of a non-Hermitian Floquet system with complicated driving protocol remains a challenging task. In this work, we define a somewhat complex driving protocol for a bipartite lattice system and discover two nontrivial topological phases that support Floquet {\pi} mode. Thereafter, we introduce unsupervised learning method in order to explore distribution features of system eigenfunctions under different magnitude of system energy gain/loss. We utilize the idea of amortized clustering and construct an algorithm selector that could dynamically upgrade with increasing gain/loss as input parameter. Proper employment of the selector enables us to reveal the regulation of dynamic localization from abundant possible wave function distribution in two-dimension lattice in another efficient way. In addition, our work provides a feasible methodology via machine learning method to assist in classification of Floquet modes.

[36]. [*From Thermalization to Multifractality: Spin-Spin Correlation in Disordered $SU(2)$-Invariant 1D Heisenberg Spin Chains*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00573 "From Thermalization to Multifractality: Spin-Spin Correlation in Disordered $SU(2)$-Invariant 1D Heisenberg Spin Chains")
Debasmita Giri, Julian Siegl, John Schliemann
We investigate spin correlations in one-dimensional $SU(2)$-invariant Heisenberg chains with exchange disorder for spin lengths $S=1/2$ and $S=1$. In the weak-disorder regime, the eigenmodes of the spin-spin correlation matrix are delocalized, consistent with ergodic behavior. Under strong disorder, the system enters a quasi-localized multifractal phase characterized by exponentially decaying, dimer-like spin correlations. Finite-size scaling of the inverse participation ratios of the correlation-matrix eigenmodes yields a correlation dimension, $D_2\approx 0.37-0.39$, confirming the stability of a multifractal regime that is distinct from both the ergodic limit ($D_2=1$) and the fully localized limit ($D_2=0$).

[37]. [*Two-photon-assisted collisions in ultracold gases of polar molecules*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00607 "Two-photon-assisted collisions in ultracold gases of polar molecules")
Charbel Karam, Gohar Hovhannesyan, Romain Vexiau, Maxence Lepers, Nadia Bouloufa-Maafa, Olivier Dulieu
We present a theoretical formalism to treat the ultracold dynamics of a pair of colliding polar molecules submitted to two laser fields. We express the dressed Hamiltonian including the dipole-dipole interaction of the colliding molecular pair, both in their ground and electronic excited states, as well as their interaction with the two laser fields. We apply adiabatic elimination of the electronic excited state to reduce the size of the dressed-state basis in which the dressed Hamiltoninan is expressed. In an application, we investigate the feasibility of two-photon collisional shielding between two \NaK molecules, which could be favored by the Raman resonance condition suppressing unwanted spontaneous emission and photon scattering. We demonstrate the influence of the laser Rabi frequencies on the dynamics through the computation of elastic, inelastic, and reactive collision rates.

[38]. [*Electronic properties of Kagome metal YbV$_3$Sb$_4$: A First-Principles Study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00655 "Electronic properties of Kagome metal YbV$_3$Sb$_4$: A First-Principles Study")
D. Gurung, Keshav Shrestha, Shalika R. Bhandari, Samy Brahimi, Samir Lounis, D. P. Rai
We have investigated the vanadium-based Kagome metal YbV$_3$Sb$_4$ using density functional theory (DFT) combined with the Wannier function analysis. We explore the electronic properties, de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) effect and Fermi surface. The inclusion of spin-orbit coupling SOC induces the splitting of Yb-4f states, while its impact on the V-3d states is moderate. Furthermore, we have incorporated SOC+U, where U being the Hubbard parameter, which drastically changes the Yb-4f states creating additional splitting leading to three distinct peaks in the density of states (DOS). The V-3d atoms with the Kagome lattice contribute maximum to the transport properties, exhibits flat bands near the EF while being protected under SOC and U+SOC. Herein, we report the vulnerability of the Yb-4f states under SOC and U+SOC. Furthurmore, The Fermi surface is found to comprise of quasi-2D cylindrical sheets centered at the Gamma-point, along with smaller pockets near the Brillouin zone boundaries, which under combined U+SOC, a small spherical pocket emerges and the cylindrical sheet exhibits slight deformations. The dHvA frequencies reach as high as 70 kilotesla, which increase with tilt angle, exhibiting a nearly parabolic trend as expected for cylindrical orbits, while a low-frequency branch remains below 1 kT. Only the U+SOC case shows noticeable modification in both the Fermi surface and the dHvA oscillation. Crucially, the $Z_2$ invariant calculation identifies YbV$_3$Sb$_4$ as a strong topological metal ($r_0 = 1$). These findings not only advance our understanding of the underlying quantum phenomena in rare-earth Kagome systems, but also establish YbV$_3$Sb$_4$ as a compelling and promising platform for exploring intertwined topology and electron correlations in kagome lattices, thereby offering valuable insights for engineering quantum phases in layered materials.

[39]. [*Lippmann-Schwinger Approach for Accurate Photoelectron Wavefunctions and Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectra from First Principles*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00683 "Lippmann-Schwinger Approach for Accurate Photoelectron Wavefunctions and Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectra from First Principles")
Ji Hoon Ryoo, Cheol-Hwan Park
We present a conceptually simple and technically straightforward method for calculating photoelectron wavefunctions that is easily integrable with standard wavefunction-based density-functional-theory packages. Our method is based on the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, naturally incorporating the boundary condition that the final photoelectron state must satisfy. The calculated results are in good agreement with the measured photon-energy- and polarization-dependence of the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of graphene, the photon-energy-dependent evolution of the so-called dark corridor arising from the pseudospin, and WSe\textsubscript{2}, the circular dichroism reflecting the hidden orbital polarization. Our study opens doors to do-it-yourself simulations of ARPES with standard density-functional-theory packages, of crucial importance in the era of ``quantum materials,'' whose key experimental tool is ARPES.

[40]. [*Screw Symmetry, Chiral Hydrodynamics and Odd Instability in Active Cholesterics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00684 "Screw Symmetry, Chiral Hydrodynamics and Odd Instability in Active Cholesterics")
Gareth P. Alexander, S. J. Kole, Ananyo Maitra, Sriram Ramaswamy
Active cholesterics are chiral in both their structure, which has continuous screw symmetry, and their active stresses, which include contributions from torque dipoles. Both expressions of chirality give rise to curl forces in the hydrodynamics, which we derive from the active Ericksen-Leslie equations using a geometric approach. This clarifies the hydrodynamics of continuous screw symmetry and provides an example of generalised odd elastic forces that originate from an equilibrium free energy. We discuss also the nonlinear structure of the active hydrodynamics in terms of the Eulerian displacement field of the cholesteric pseudolayers. For the active instability, screw symmetry generates a contribution of chiral activity to the linearised pseudolayer hydrodynamics that is absent in materials with chiral activity but achiral structure. When the two forms are sufficiently antagonistic, this term produces a new active instability with threshold and characteristic wavevector distinct from those of the active Helfrich-Hurault instability in chiral active smectics. Finally, we comment on the isotropic chiral hydrodynamics of materials with three-dimensional screw symmetry.

[41]. [*XANES absorption spectra of penta-graphene and penta-SiC2 with different terminations: a computational study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00704 "XANES absorption spectra of penta-graphene and penta-SiC2 with different terminations: a computational study")
Andrea Pedrielli, Tommaso Morresi, Simone Taioli
In recent research, penta-graphene and penta-SiC2 have emerged as innovative 2D materials consisting exclusively of pentagons. However, there is still a significant gap in the theoretical characterization of these materials, which hinders progress in their synthesis and potential technological applications. This study aims to close this gap by investigating the X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) of these materials through ab initio calculations. In particular, we analyze the XANES spectra of penta-graphene in its pristine, hydrogenated, and hydroxylated states, and we investigate the effects of substitution by a single silicon in both penta-graphene and pentagraphane. In addition, we calculate the XANES spectra for pristine and hydrogenated penta-SiC2. This work sets the stage for the possible identification of penta-graphene and penta-SiC2 phases by X-ray spectroscopy at the experimental level and lays the foundation for the future engineering of the absorption properties of these materials in optical devices.

[42]. [*Rigid body rotation and chiral reorientation combine in filamentous E. coli swimming in low-Re flows*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00779 "Rigid body rotation and chiral reorientation combine in filamentous E. coli swimming in low-Re flows")
Richard Z. DeCurtis, Yongtae Ahn, Jane Hill, Sara M. Hashmi
Antibiotic doses below a minimum inhibitory concentration turn off bacteria cell division, but not cell growth. As a result, rod-like bacteria including E. coli can elongate many times their original length without increasing their width. The swimming behavior of these filamentous bacteria through small channels may provide insights into how antibiotic-resistant bacteria swim to channel walls. Such swimming behaviors in settings like hospital tubing may facilitate adhesion, biofilm formation and infection. Despite the importance of understanding the behavior of bacteria not killed by antibiotics, the swimming of filamentous bacteria in external flows has not received much attention. We study the swimming of stressed, filamentous E. coli. In quiescence, highly elongated E. coli swim with a sinusoidal undulation, suggesting rigid body rotation of the long, slightly segmented cell bodies. In low Reynolds number pressure-driven flows through a microchannel, undulation becomes irregular and may stop and start within a particular bacteria trajectory. We refer to this behavior in flow as `wiggling.' Rigid body rotation persists in flow, appearing as a high frequency change in body orientation on top of a slower frequency of reorientation. Chiral reorientation can explain the slower reorientation. We quantify swimming in two flow rates and observe both rheotaxis and preferential orientation of bacteria bodies. We find that the faster flow constrains wiggling bacteria trajectories and orientations more than slower flow does. Interestingly, not all bacteria in flow wiggle. Populations of `non-wiggling' filamentous E. coli follow streamlines, without preferential orientation, flowing faster than wigglers. Non-wigglers do not behave like chiral rods propelled by flagellar bundles, but like rigid rods. Differentiating these populations may have important implications for understanding motility loss.

[43]. [*On the interaction of dilatancy and friction in the behavior of fluid-saturated sheared granular materials: a coupled Computational Fluid Dynamics--Discrete Element Method study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00786 "On the interaction of dilatancy and friction in the behavior of fluid-saturated sheared granular materials: a coupled Computational Fluid Dynamics--Discrete Element Method study")
Bimal Chhushyabaga (Department of Civil,Environmental Engineering, University of Houston), Behrooz Ferdowsi (Department of Civil,Environmental Engineering, University of Houston)
Frictional instabilities in fluid-saturated granular materials underlie critical natural hazards such as submarine landslides and earthquake initiation. Distinct failure behaviors emerge under subaerial and subaqueous conditions due to the coupled effects of mechanical deformation, interparticle friction, and fluid interactions. This study employs three-dimensional coupled Computational Fluid Dynamics-Discrete Element Method (CFD-DEM) simulations to investigate the collapse and runout dynamics of dense and loose granular assemblies across these settings. Parametric analyses reveal that pore pressure evolution plays a central role in governing failure mechanisms: dense assemblies stabilize through dilation, while loose assemblies undergo rapid compaction and fluidization, particularly under subaqueous conditions. Spatiotemporal analyses of coarse-grained fields further highlight strain-rate-dependent behavior driven by evolving porosity and effective stress. Both environments exhibit rate-strengthening behavior that scales with the inertial number (In) and viscous number (Iv), though driven by distinct mechanisms: subaerial systems are dominated by interparticle contact networks, whereas subaqueous systems are influenced by fluid drag, pore-pressure buildup, and lubrication. An analytical solution for excess pore pressure is compared with breaching-induced pressure distributions from CFD-DEM simulations, using input parameters derived from numerical triaxial DEM tests. The model captures fluid-particle coupling effectively, reproducing comparable excess pore pressures at steady state, while early-time discrepancies underscore the complexities of transient interactions. These findings advance the understanding of failure mechanics in saturated granular media and support the development of physics-based models for mitigating hazards associated with subaqueous granular flows.

[44]. [*On the criticality of the configuration-space statistical geometry*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00787 "On the criticality of the configuration-space statistical geometry")
Yu-Jing Liu, Wen-Yu Su, Yong-Feng Yang, Nvsen Ma, Chen Cheng
While phases and phase transitions are conventionally described by local order parameters in real space, we present a unified framework characterizing the phase transition through the geometry of configuration space defined by the statistics of pairwise distances $r_H$ between configurations. Focusing on the concrete example of Ising spins, we establish crucial analytical links between this geometry and fundamental real-space observables, i.e., the magnetization and two-point spin correlation functions. This link unveils the universal scaling law in the configuration space: the standard deviation of the normalized distances exhibits universal criticality as $\sqrt{\mathrm{Var}(r_H)}\sim L^{-2\beta/\nu}$, provided that the system possesses zero magnetization and satisfies $4\beta/\nu < d$. Numerical stochastic series expansion quantum Monte Carlo simulations on the transverse-field Ising model (TFIM) validate this scaling law: (i) It is perfectly validated in the one-dimensional TFIM, where all theoretical criteria are satisfied; (ii) Its robustness is confirmed in the two-dimensional TFIM, where, despite the theoretical applicability condition being at its marginal limit, our method robustly captures the effective scaling dominated by physical correlations; (iii) The method's specificity is demonstrated via a critical control experiment in the orthogonal $\hat{\sigma}^x$ basis, where no long-range order exists, correctly reverts to a non-critical background scaling. Moreover, the distribution probability $P(r_H)$ parameterized by the transverse field $h$ forms a one-dimensional manifold. Information-geometric analyses, particularly the Fisher information defined on this manifold, successfully pinpoint the TFIM phase transition, regardless of the measuring basis.

[45]. [*Persistent spin textures, altermagnetism and charge-to-spin conversion in metallic chiral crystals TM$_{3}$X$_{6}$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00789 "Persistent spin textures, altermagnetism and charge-to-spin conversion in metallic chiral crystals TM$_{3}$X$_{6}$")
Karma Tenzin, Berkay Kilic, Raghottam Sattigeri, Zhiren He, Chao Chen Ye, Marcio Costa, Marco Buongiorno Nardelli, Carmine Autieri, Jagoda Slawinska
Chiral crystals, due to the lack of inversion and mirror symmetries, exhibit unique spin responses to external fields, enabling physical effects rarely observed in high-symmetry systems. Here, we show that materials from the chiral dichalcogenide family TM$_3$X$_6$ (T = 3d, M = 4d/5d, X = S) exhibit persistent spin texture (PST) - unidirectional spin polarization of states across large regions of the reciprocal space - in their nonmagnetic metallic phase. Using the example of NiTa$_{3}$S$_{6}$ and NiNb$_{3}$S$_{6}$, we show that PSTs cover the full Fermi surface, a rare and desirable feature that enables efficient charge-to-spin conversion and suggests long spin lifetimes and coherent spin transport above magnetic ordering temperatures. At low temperatures, the materials that order antiferromagnetically become chiral altermagnets, where spin textures originating from spin-orbit coupling and altermagnetism combine in a way that sensitively depends on the orientation of the Neel vector. Using symmetry analysis and first-principles calculations, we classify magnetic ground states across the family, identify cases with weak ferromagnetism, and track the evolution of spin textures and charge-to-spin conversion across magnetic phases and different Neel vector orientations, revealing spin transport signatures that allow one to distinguish Neel vector directions. These findings establish TM$_3$X$_6$ as a tunable platform for efficient charge-to-spin conversion and spin transport, combining structural chirality, persistent spin textures, and altermagnetism.

[46]. [*Magnetic Octupole Hall Effect in d-Wave Altermagnets*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00794 "Magnetic Octupole Hall Effect in d-Wave Altermagnets")
Hye-Won Ko, Kyung-Jin Lee
Order parameters not only characterize symmetry-broken equilibrium phases but also govern transport phenomena in the nonequilibrium regime. Altermagnets, a class of magnetic systems integrating ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic features, host multipolar orders in addition to dipolar Neel order. In this work, we demonstrate the multipole Hall effect in d-wave altermagnets--a transverse flow of multipole moments induced by an electric field. Using symmetry analysis and linear response theory, we show that the magnetic octupole Hall effect persists even in symmetries where the spin-splitter effect is forbidden and thus provides a robust experimental signature. In addition, we identify a sizable electric quadrupole Hall effect, originating from quadrupole splittings in the band structure. Our results expand the family of Hall effects to include higher-order multipolar responses and establish altermagnets as a versatile platform for exploring multipole transport beyond spin and orbital degrees of freedom.

[47]. [*Chiral anomaly-induced nonlinear Hall effect in spin-orbit coupled noncentrosymmetric metals*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00821 "Chiral anomaly-induced nonlinear Hall effect in spin-orbit coupled noncentrosymmetric metals")
Gautham Varma K, Mohd. Hashim Raza, Azaz Ahmad
Recent studies have shown that chiral anomaly is not limited to WSMs, but are also shown by a larger class of materials called spin orbit coupled noncentrosymmetric metals (SOC-NCMs),which has shed more insight into the origin of chiral anomaly as a Fermi surface property rather than a nodal property. In this study, we explore nonlinear transport responses in SOC-NCMswithin the framework of semiclassical dynamics, employing the Maxwell-Boltzmann transport theory augmented by charge conservation and momentum-dependent scattering processes. We take into account both non-magnetic and magnetic impurity scattering mechanisms. We demonstrate that the chiral-anomaly-induced nonlinear Hall (CNLH) response exhibits a characteristic quadratic dependence on the applied magnetic field and remains negative for both types of impurities. We find that magnetic scatterers leading to enhanced/suppressed interband scattering modifies the magnitude of the signal, but does not affect its qualitative behavior. In contrast, the presence of tilt in the band dispersion induces a pronounced anisotropic response, including a magnetic-field-direction dependent sign reversal that can be categorized into weak and strong regimes. Furthermore, the CNLH response shows substantial directional anisotropy governed by the relative orientation of the external magnetic field and the tilt vector. Our findings will be helpful in designing the experimental setup to get direction-dependent conductivity, which can be tuned externally with the help of magnetic impurity sites.

[48]. [*Vector spin Seebeck effect and spin swapping effect in antiferromagnetic insulators with non-collinear spin structure*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03382 "Vector spin Seebeck effect and spin swapping effect in antiferromagnetic insulators with non-collinear spin structure")
Jinsong Xu, Weiwei Lin, Jiaming He, J. -S. Zhou, Danru Qu, Ssu-Yen Huang, C. L. Chien
Antiferromagnets (AFs) are prospective for next-generation high-density and high-speed spintronic applications due to their negligible stray field and ultrafast spin dynamics, notwithstanding the challenges in detecting and manipulating AF order with no magnetization (M = 0). Among the AFs, non-collinear AFs are of particular interest because of their unique properties arising from the non-collinear spin structure and the small magnetization M. In this work, we describe the recently observed vector spin Seebeck effect in non-collinear LuFeO$_3$, where the magneto-thermovoltage under an in-plane temperature gradient, not previously observed, is consistent with the predicted spin swapping effect. Our results shed light on the importance of the non-collinear spin structure in the emerging spin phenomena in non-collinear AFs and offer a new class of materials for AF spintronics and spin caloritronics.

[49]. [*Spin Quenching and Transport by Hidden Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interactions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06690 "Spin Quenching and Transport by Hidden Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interactions")
Xiyin Ye, Qirui Cui, Weiwei Lin, Tao Yu
Explicit interactions, \textit{e.g.}, dipolar and exchange couplings, usually govern magnetization dynamics. Some interactions may be hidden from the global crystal symmetry. We report that in a large class of \textit{uniaxial} antiferromagnets, a \textit{hidden} Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction with retaining global inversion symmetry quenches the spin of magnon along the N\'eel vector ${\bf n}$, thus forbidding its angular-momentum flow. Some magnon spins, termed ``nodal" and ``corner" spins, survive when they distribute \textit{singularly} at the hot spots, i.e., high-symmetric degeneracy points in the Brillouin zone, and are protected by crystal symmetries. The biased magnetic field along ${\bf n}$ broadens such distributions, allowing bulk spin transport with unique signatures in the magnetic field and temperature dependencies. This explains recent experiments and highlights the role of hidden interaction.

[50]. [*Free Independence and Unitary Design from Random Matrix Product Unitaries*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00051 "Free Independence and Unitary Design from Random Matrix Product Unitaries")
Neil Dowling, Jacopo De Nardis, Markus Heinrich, Xhek Turkeshi, Silvia Pappalardi
Understanding how complex quantum systems emulate randomness is central to quantum chaos, thermalization, and information theory. In one setting, out-of-time-ordered correlators (OTOCs) have recently been shown to probe asymptotic freeness between Heisenberg operators: the non-commutative generalization of statistical independence. In a distinct research direction, the concept of approximate unitary designs have led to efficient constructions of unitaries that look random according to forward-in-time protocols. Bridging these two concepts, in this work we study the emergence of freeness from a random matrix product unitary (RMPU) ensemble. We prove that, with only polynomial bond dimension, these unitaries reproduce Haar values of higher-order OTOCs for local, finite-trace observables -- precisely the observables that lead to thermal correlations in chaotic many-body systems according to the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. The RMPU ensemble provably forms a unitary design, but, we argue, this does not account for average OTOC behavior and therefore the emergence of freeness. We further compute the ensemble's frame potential exactly to second order, showing convergence to Haar values also with polynomial deviations, indicating that freeness is also reached on-average for global observables. On the other hand, to reproduce the Haar-like OTOC value for local, traceless observables, the considered ensemble requires volume-law operator entanglement. Such correlations therefore lie beyond the paradigm of random unitary features which can be replicated efficiently. Our results highlight the need to refine previous notions of unitary designs in the context of operator dynamics, guiding us towards protocols for genuine quantum advantage while shedding light on the emergent complexity of chaotic many-body systems.

[51]. [*Entanglement spreading and emergent locality in Brownian SYK chains*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00060 "Entanglement spreading and emergent locality in Brownian SYK chains")
Onkar Parrikar, Jatin Narde, Harshit Rajgadia, Sandip Trivedi
The Ryu-Takayanagi (RT) formula and its interpretation in terms of quantum error correction (QEC) implies an emergent locality for the spread of quantum information in holographic CFTs, where information injected at a point in the boundary theory spreads within a sharp light-cone corresponding to the butterfly velocity. This emergent locality is a necessary condition for the existence of a geometric bulk dual with an RT-like formula for entanglement entropy. In this paper, we use tools from QEC to study the spread of quantum information and the emergence of a sharp light-cone in an analytically tractable model of chaotic dynamics, namely a one-dimensional Brownian SYK chain. We start with an infinite temperature state in this model and inject a qudit at time $t=0$ at some point $p$ on the chain. We then explicitly calculate the amount of information of the qudit contained in an interval of length $2\ell$ (centered around $p$) at some later time $t=T$. We find that at strong coupling, this quantity shows a sharp transition as a function of $\ell$ from near zero to near maximal correlation. The transition occurs at $\ell \sim v_B T$, with $v_B$ being the butterfly velocity. Underlying the emergence of this sharp light-cone is a non-linear generalization of the diffusion equation called the FKPP equation, which admits sharp domain wall solutions at late times and strong coupling. These domain wall solutions can be understood on physical grounds from properties of operator growth in chaotic systems.

[52]. [*Imaginary Time Spectral Transforms for Excited State Preparation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00065 "Imaginary Time Spectral Transforms for Excited State Preparation")
D. A. Millar, L. W. Anderson, E. Altamura, O. Wallis, M. E. Sahin, J. Crain, S. J. Thomson
Excited states of many-body quantum systems play a key role in a wide range of physical and chemical phenomena. Unlike ground states, for which many efficient variational techniques exist, there are few ways to systematically construct excited states of generic quantum systems on either classical or quantum hardware. To address this challenge, we introduce a general approach that allows us to obtain arbitrary eigenstates of quantum systems at a given energy. By combining the shift-invert mechanism with imaginary time evolution, we are able to avoid explicit inversion of the Hamiltonian and construct excited eigenstates of large many-body quantum systems. We demonstrate the technique classically by applying it to large disordered spin chains. Based on this approach, we propose a hybrid scheme suitable for near-future quantum hardware.

[53]. [*Efficient and simple Gibbs state preparation of the 2D toric code via duality to classical Ising chains*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00126 "Efficient and simple Gibbs state preparation of the 2D toric code via duality to classical Ising chains")
Pablo P\'aez-Velasco (Departamento de An\'alisis Matem\'atico y Matem\'atica Aplicada, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Instituto de Ciencias Matem\'aticas), Niclas Schilling (Fachbereich Physik, Universit\"at T\"ubingen), Samuel O. Scalet (Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, IBM Quantum, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center), Frank Verstraete (Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ghent University), \'Angela Capel (Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Fachbereich Mathematik, Universit\"at T\"ubingen)
We introduce the notion of polynomial-depth duality transformations, which relates two sets of operator algebras through a conjugation by a poly-depth quantum circuit, and make use of this to construct efficient Gibbs samplers for a variety of interesting quantum Hamiltonians as they are poly-depth dual to classical Hamiltonians. This is for example the case for the 2D toric code, which is demonstrated to be poly-depth dual to two decoupled classical Ising spin chains for any system size, and we give evidence that such dualities hold for a wide class of stabilizer Hamiltonians. Additionally, we extend the above notion of duality to Lindbladians in order to show that mixing times and other quantities such as the spectral gap or the modified logarithmic Sobolev inequality are preserved under duality.

[54]. [*Effective 2D Envelope Function Theory for Silicon Quantum Dots*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00139 "Effective 2D Envelope Function Theory for Silicon Quantum Dots")
Christian W. Binder, Guido Burkard, Andrew J. Fisher
We present a rigorous method to reduce the three-dimensional (3D) description of a quantum dot in silicon to an effective two-dimensional (2D) envelope function theory for electron spin qubits. By systematically integrating out the strongly confined vertical dimension using a Born-Oppenheimer-inspired ansatz at the envelope-function level, we derive an effective in-plane potential that faithfully captures the essential electrostatics of the full 3D system. Considering the lowest two eigenstates of the out-of-plane direction, this reduction leads to the natural and explicit emergence of the valley degree of freedom within a 2D formalism, which is derived here from first principles. We validate the accuracy of the method through comparisons with full 3D simulations and demonstrate its superiority over naive 2D slicing, particularly in the presence of interface roughness. Crucially, the reduction in dimensionality leads to substantial computational savings, making our approach particularly well suited for simulating two-electron systems, e.g., for the extraction of parameters such as the exchange coupling. Beyond its practical utility, the rigorous 2D envelope function theory that is introduced in this study incorporates valley physics in a physically grounded manner, offering conceptual clarity on the role of valley states in qubit operation and measurement.

[55]. [*Core binding energies of solids with periodic EOM-CCSD*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00168 "Core binding energies of solids with periodic EOM-CCSD")
Ethan A. Vo, Timothy C. Berkelbach
We report the core binding energies of K-edge and L-edge transitions in simple semiconducting and insulating solids using periodic equation-of-motion coupled-cluster theory with single and double excitations (EOM-CCSD). In our all-electron calculations, we use triple zeta basis sets with core correlation, and we sample the Brillouin zone using up to 4x4x4 k-points. Our final numbers, which are obtained through composite corrections and extrapolation to the thermodynamic limit, exhibit errors of about 2 eV when compared to experimental values. This level of accuracy from CCSD is about the same as it is for molecules. A low-scaling approximation to EOM-CCSD performs marginally worse at lower cost, with errors of about 3 eV.

[56]. [*Breakdown of Fermi's Golden Rule in 1d systems at non-zero temperature*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00254 "Breakdown of Fermi's Golden Rule in 1d systems at non-zero temperature")
Thomas Young, Jerome LLoyd, Curt von Keyserlingk
In interacting quantum systems, the single-particle Green's function is expected to decay in time due to the interaction induced decoherence of quasiparticles. In the limit of weak interaction strengths ($\Delta$), a naive application of Fermi's Golden Rule (FGR) predicts an $\mathcal{O}(\Delta^{2})$ quasiparticle decay rate. However, for 1d fermions on the lattice at $T>0$, this calculation gives a divergent result and the scaling of the quasiparticle lifetime with interaction strength remains an open question. In this work we propose a solution to this question: combining numerical simulations using the recently introduced dissipation-assisted operator evolution (DAOE) method, with non-perturbative diagrammatic re-summations, we predict a logarithmic enhancement of the quasiparticle decay rate $\tau^{-1} \sim \Delta^{2} \log \Delta^{-2}$. We argue that this effect is present in a wide variety of well-known weakly interacting quantum fermionic and bosonic systems, and even in some classical systems, provided the non-interacting limit has quasiparticles with a generic dispersion.

[57]. [*Hybrid Scandium Aluminum Nitride/Silicon Nitride Integrated Photonic Circuits*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00314 "Hybrid Scandium Aluminum Nitride/Silicon Nitride Integrated Photonic Circuits")
Jiangnan Liu, Shuai Liu, Abdur-Raheem Al-Hallak, Huabin Yu, Zhengwei Ye, Yuheng Zhang, Zheshen Zhang, Zetian Mi
Scandium-doped aluminum nitride has recently emerged as a promising material for quantum photonic integrated circuits (PICs) due to its unique combination of strong second-order nonlinearity, ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity, and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) compatibility. However, the relatively high optical loss reported to date-typically above 2.4 dB/cm-remains a key challenge that limits its widespread application in low-loss PICs. Here, we present a monolithically integrated $\mathrm{Si}_3\mathrm{N}_4$-ScAlN waveguide platform that overcomes this limitation. By confining light within an etched $\mathrm{Si}_3\mathrm{N}_4$ waveguide while preserving the functional properties of the underlying ScAlN layer, we achieve an intrinsic quality factor of $Q_{\mathrm{i}} = 3.35 \times 10^5$, corresponding to a propagation loss of 1.03 dB/cm-comparable to that of commercial single-mode silicon-on-insulator (SOI) waveguides. This hybrid architecture enables low-loss and scalable fabrication while retaining the advanced functionalities offered by ScAlN, such as ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity. Our results establish a new pathway for ScAlN-based PICs with potential applications in high-speed optical communication, modulation, sensing, nonlinear optics, and quantum optics within CMOS-compatible platforms.

[58]. [*Replacement-Type Quantum Gates*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00437 "Replacement-Type Quantum Gates")
Florian Ginzel, Javad Kazemi, Valentin Torggler, Wolfgang Lechner
We introduce the paradigm of replacement-type quantum gates. This type of gate introduces input qubits, candidate qubits, and output qubits. The candidate qubits are prepared such, that a displacement conditional on the input qubit results in the targeted output state. Finally, the circuit continues with the output qubits constructed from the candidate qubits instead of the input qubits, thus the name "replacement-type gate". We present examples of replacement-type $X$ and $\mathrm{CNOT}$ gates realized with spin qubits and with neutral atom qubits. By making use of the extended Hilbert space, including the position of the particles, these gates approximately preserve the innate noise bias of the qubits. The gate preserves the noise-bias which motivates advanced quantum computer architectures with error correction.

[59]. [*Photon-mediated interactions and dynamics of coherently driven quantum emitters in complex photonic environments*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00465 "Photon-mediated interactions and dynamics of coherently driven quantum emitters in complex photonic environments")
Alberto Miguel-Torcal, Alejandro Gonz\'alez-Tudela, F. J. Garc\'ia-Vidal, Antonio I. Fern\'andez-Dom\'inguez
In recent years, Born-Markov master equations based on tracing out the electromagnetic degrees of freedom have been extensively employed in the description of quantum optical phenomena originating from photon-mediated interactions in quantum emitter ensembles. The breakdown of these effective models, built on assumptions such as ensemble spectral homogeneity, an unstructured photonic density of states, and weak light-matter coupling, has also recently attracted considerable attention. Here, we investigate the accuracy of this well-established framework beyond the most conventional, and extensively explored, spontaneous emission configuration. Specifically, we consider a system comprising two coherently driven and detuned quantum emitters, embedded within a hybrid photonic-plasmonic cavity, formed by a metallic nanorod integrated into a high-refractive-index dielectric microresonator. The local density of photonic states in this structure exhibits a complex frequency dependence, making it a compelling platform for exploring photon-mediated interactions beyond the assumptions above. We benchmark this modeling approach for the quantum dynamics of the emitter pair against exact calculations based on a macroscopic field quantization formalism, providing an illustrative assessment of its validity in significantly structured and dispersive photonic environments. Our analysis reveals four distinct regimes of laser driving and frequency splitting that lead to markedly different levels of accuracy in the effective model.

[60]. [*Emergent Bifurcations in Quantum Circuit Stability from Hidden Parameter Statistics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00484 "Emergent Bifurcations in Quantum Circuit Stability from Hidden Parameter Statistics")
Pilsung Kang
The compression of quantum circuits is a foundational challenge for near-term quantum computing, yet the principles governing circuit stability remain poorly understood. We investigate this problem through a large-scale numerical analysis of 300 structurally-uniform circuits across 10, 12, and 14 qubits. Despite their macroscopic uniformity, we find that each ensemble universally bifurcates into distinct robust and fragile classes. We solve the puzzle of this emergent bifurcation, demonstrating that its origin is not structural, but is instead encoded in the statistical properties of the gate rotation parameters. Fragile circuits consistently exhibit a universal signature of ``statistical brittleness,'' characterized by low parameter variability and a scarcity of small-angle gates. We uncover the underlying physical mechanism for this phenomenon: Paradoxical Importance where smaller-angle gates are counter-intuitively more critical to the circuit's function, an effect most pronounced in fragile circuits. This reliance on fine-tuning explains why statistically brittle circuits are uniquely vulnerable to failure under compression. These findings establish a new framework for engineering resilient quantum algorithms, shifting the focus from macroscopic structure to the microscopic statistical properties of a circuit's parameters.

[61]. [*Learning Potential Energy Surfaces of Hydrogen Atom Transfer Reactions in Peptides*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00578 "Learning Potential Energy Surfaces of Hydrogen Atom Transfer Reactions in Peptides")
Marlen Neubert, Patrick Reiser, Frauke Gr\"ater, Pascal Friederich
Hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) reactions are essential in many biological processes, such as radical migration in damaged proteins, but their mechanistic pathways remain incompletely understood. Simulating HAT is challenging due to the need for quantum chemical accuracy at biologically relevant scales; thus, neither classical force fields nor DFT-based molecular dynamics are applicable. Machine-learned potentials offer an alternative, able to learn potential energy surfaces (PESs) with near-quantum accuracy. However, training these models to generalize across diverse HAT configurations, especially at radical positions in proteins, requires tailored data generation and careful model selection. Here, we systematically generate HAT configurations in peptides to build large datasets using semiempirical methods and DFT. We benchmark three graph neural network architectures (SchNet, Allegro, and MACE) on their ability to learn HAT PESs and indirectly predict reaction barriers from energy predictions. MACE consistently outperforms the others in energy, force, and barrier prediction, achieving a mean absolute error of 1.13 kcal/mol on out-of-distribution DFT barrier predictions. This accuracy enables integration of ML potentials into large-scale collagen simulations to compute reaction rates from predicted barriers, advancing mechanistic understanding of HAT and radical migration in peptides. We analyze scaling laws, model transferability, and cost-performance trade-offs, and outline strategies for improvement by combining ML potentials with transition state search algorithms and active learning. Our approach is generalizable to other biomolecular systems, enabling quantum-accurate simulations of chemical reactivity in complex environments.

[62]. [*Spontaneous emission as a bridge from Lindbladian to nonreciprocal reservoirs*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00689 "Spontaneous emission as a bridge from Lindbladian to nonreciprocal reservoirs")
C. J. Bolech, T. Giamarchi
We study an out-of-equilibrium quantum system in which a state connecting two reservoirs is also coupled by stimulated and spontaneous emission of photons to an antitrapped state, thus implementing particle loss. After revisiting the spontaneous emission process, we show that the proper effective description of such a system requires one to go beyond the usual Lindbladian formalism and includes a nonreciprocal (``non-Hermitian'') coupling to the reservoir modeling the untrapped state. The presence of both, the reservoirs and the nonreciprocal coupling, have observable consequences that we compute, for example, by looking at the quantum Zeno effect in the loss current. We discuss the connection of our findings to possible experiments in cold atomic gases.

[63]. [*There is no ultrastrong coupling with photons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00702 "There is no ultrastrong coupling with photons")
Diego Fern\'andez de la Pradilla, Esteban Moreno, Johannes Feist
Theoretical accounts of ultrastrongly coupled light-matter systems commonly assume that it arises from the interaction of an emitter with propagating photon modes supported by a structure, understanding photons as the excitations of the transverse electromagnetic field. This description discards the Coulomb interaction between the emitter and structure charges. Here, we show with a general argument based on electromagnetic constraints that the emitter-photon coupling strength is fundamentally limited. Accordingly, we conclude that the ultrastrong coupling regime cannot be reached with photons. Instead, it must originate from the Coulomb interactions between charges. A further corollary is that the so-called polarization self-energy term does not need to be included. We illustrate our claims by solving an analytical model of the paradigmatic case of an emitter next to a metallic nanosphere. These findings shed light on the fundamental processes underlying ultrastrong coupling, clarify the role of the polarization self-energy term and compel a reevaluation of previous literature.

[64]. [*Electrical and Thermal Conductivity of Earth's Iron-enriched Basal Magma Ocean*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00791 "Electrical and Thermal Conductivity of Earth's Iron-enriched Basal Magma Ocean")
Francis Dragulet, Lars Stixrude
The Earth's earliest magnetic field may have originated in a basal magma ocean, a layer of silicate melt surround the core that could have persisted for billions of years. Recent studies show that the electrical conductivity of liquid with a bulk silicate Earth composition exceeds 10000 S/m at basal magma ocean conditions, potentially surprising the threshold for dynamo activity. Over most of its history however, the basal magma ocean is more enriched in iron than the bulk silicate Earth, due to iron's incompatibility in the mineral assemblages of the lower mantle. Using ab-initio molecular dynamics calculations, we examine how iron content affects the silicate dynamo hypothesis. We investigate how the electrical conductivity of silicate liquid changes with iron enrichment, at pressures and temperatures relevant for Earth's basal magma ocean. We also compute the electronic contribution to the thermal conductivity , to evaluate convective instability of basal magma oceans. Finally, we apply our results to model the thermal and magnetic evolution of Earth's basal magma ocean over time.

[65]. [*Effect of Doping on the phase stability and Superconductivity in LaH10*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11354 "Effect of Doping on the phase stability and Superconductivity in LaH10")
Zepeng Wu, Yang Sun, Artur P. Durajski, Feng Zheng, Vladimir Antropov, Kai-Ming Ho, Shunqing Wu
We present a computational investigation into the effects of chemical doping with 15 different elements on phase stability and superconductivity in the LaH10 structure. Most doping elements were found to induce softening of phonon modes, enhancing electron-phonon coupling and improving critical superconducting temperature while weakening dynamical stability. Unlike these dopants, Ce was found to extend the range of dynamical stability for LaH10 by eliminating the van Hove singularity near the Fermi level. The doped compound, La0.75Ce0.25H10, maintains high-temperature superconductivity. We also demonstrate that different Ce doping configurations in the LaH10 structure have a minimal effect on energetic stability and electron-phonon coupling strength. Our findings suggest that Ce is a promising dopant to stabilize LaH10 at lower pressures while preserving its high-temperature superconductivity.

[66]. [*Bound energy, entanglement and identifying critical points in 1D long-range Kitaev model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05063 "Bound energy, entanglement and identifying critical points in 1D long-range Kitaev model")
Akash Mitra, Shashi C. L. Srivastava
We investigate the entanglement structure of a bipartite quantum system through the lens of quantum thermodynamics in the absence of conformal symmetry. Specifically, we consider the long-range Kitaev model, where the pairing interaction decays as a power law with exponent $\alpha$, with broken conformal symmetry for $\alpha<3/2$. We analytically show that the bound energy, a quantum thermodynamical quantity, is linearly proportional to the square of entanglement entropy per unit system size for $\alpha=1$ where conformal symmetry is broken. We further show that for all values of $\alpha$, bound energy, in the thermodynamic limit, shows a pronounced minimum at the critical point, which enables the identification of $\mu=1$.

[67]. [*Exact Diagonalization Study on Avalanches in Many-Body Localized Constrained Spin Chains*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14372 "Exact Diagonalization Study on Avalanches in Many-Body Localized Constrained Spin Chains")
Shuangyuan Lu
Avalanches are believed to be the mechanism behind the transition from many-body localization to the thermal phase. We utilize spin chains with constraints to study the physics of quantum avalanches by exact diagonalization of disordered systems coupled to a thermal bath. Single-spin observables are used to characterize localization and quantify the influence of the thermal bath on disordered spin chains. Constraints on the Hilbert space confine the dynamics to a subspace, effectively reducing the Hilbert space dimension and enabling the study of larger systems with limited computational resources. We study the PXP model, and in addition, we construct spin chains with constraints by searching for constraints with a genetic algorithm to reach larger system sizes. We define quantities to measure the strength of avalanches and use these to compare different models. We find that avalanches are more pronounced in models with constraints compared to those without constraints. Results from exact diagonalization are compared with those from studying the Lindblad master equation. We also identify models that exhibit no thermal phases and find stable ergodicity breaking.

[68]. [*Kardar-Parisi-Zhang scaling in time-crystalline matter*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09677 "Kardar-Parisi-Zhang scaling in time-crystalline matter")
Romain Daviet, Carl Philipp Zelle, Armin Asadollahi, Sebastian Diehl
We discuss the universal behavior linked to the Goldstone mode associated with the spontaneous breaking of time-translation symmetry in many-body systems, in which the order parameter traces out a limit cycle. We show that this universal behavior is closely tied to Kardar-Parisi-Zhang physics, which can strongly affect the scaling properties in all dimensions. Our work predicts the relevance of KPZ in numerous systems such as nonreciprocal phases in active matter, active magnets, driven-dissipative quantum systems, and synchronization of oscillators.

[69]. [*Theory of Valley Splitting in Si/SiGe Spin-Qubits: Interplay of Strain, Resonances and Random Alloy Disorder*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.20618 "Theory of Valley Splitting in Si/SiGe Spin-Qubits: Interplay of Strain, Resonances and Random Alloy Disorder")
Abel Thayil, Lasse Ermoneit, Markus Kantner
Electron spin-qubits in silicon-germanium (SiGe) heterostructures are a major candidate for the realization of scalable quantum computers. A critical challenge in strained Si/SiGe quantum wells (QWs) is the existence of two nearly degenerate valley states at the conduction band minimum that can lead to leakage of quantum information. To address this issue, various strategies have been explored to enhance the valley splitting (i.e., the energy gap between the two low-energy conduction band minima), such as sharp interfaces, oscillating germanium concentrations in the QW (known as wiggle wells) and shear strain engineering. In this work, we develop a comprehensive envelope-function theory augmented by an empirical nonlocal pseudopotential model to incorporate the effects of alloy disorder, strain, and non-trivial resonances arising from interactions between valley states across neighboring Brillouin zones. We apply our model to analyze common epitaxial profiles studied in the literature with a focus on wiggle well type structures and compare our results with previous work. Our framework provides an efficient tool for quantifying the interplay of these effects on the valley splitting, enabling complex epitaxial profile optimization in future work.

[70]. [*Scaling analysis and renormalization group on the mobility edge in the quantum random energy model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.06563 "Scaling analysis and renormalization group on the mobility edge in the quantum random energy model")
Federico Balducci, Giacomo Bracci Testasecca, Jacopo Niedda, Antonello Scardicchio, Carlo Vanoni
Building on recent progress in the study of Anderson and many-body localization via the renormalization group (RG), we examine the scaling theory of localization in the quantum Random Energy Model (QREM). The QREM is known to undergo a localization-delocalization transition at finite energy density, while remaining fully ergodic at the center of the spectrum. At zero energy density, we show that RG trajectories consistently flow toward the ergodic phase, and are characterized by an unconventional scaling of the fractal dimension near the ergodic fixed point. When the disorder amplitude is rescaled, as suggested by the forward scattering approximation approach, a localization transition emerges also at the center of the spectrum, with properties analogous to the Anderson transition on expander graphs. At finite energy density, a localization transition takes place without disorder rescaling, and yet it exhibits a scaling behavior analogous to the one observed on expander graphs. The universality class of the model remains unchanged under the rescaling of the disorder, reflecting the independence of the RG from microscopic details. Our findings demonstrate the robustness of the scaling behavior of random graphs and offer new insights into the many-body localization transition.

[71]. [*Athermal creep deformation of ultrastable amorphous solids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17952 "Athermal creep deformation of ultrastable amorphous solids")
Pinaki Chaudhuri, Ludovic Berthier, Misaki Ozawa
We numerically investigate the athermal creep deformation of amorphous materials having a wide range of stability. The imposed shear stress serves as the control parameter, allowing us to examine the time-dependent transient response through both the macroscopic strain and microscopic observables. Least stable samples exhibit monotonicity in the transient strain rate versus time, while more stable samples display a pronounced non-monotonic S-shaped curve, corresponding to failure by sharp shear band formation. We identify a diverging timescale associated with the fluidization process and extract the corresponding critical exponents. Our results are compared with predictions from existing scaling theories relevant to soft matter systems. The numerical findings for stable, brittle-like materials represent a challenge for theoretical descriptions. We monitor the microscopic initiation of shear bands during creep responses. Our study encompasses creep deformation across a variety of materials ranging from ductile soft matter to brittle metallic and oxide glasses, all within the same numerical framework.

[72]. [*Beyond Conventional Pairing: Bosonic Quartic Superfluidity, Exotic XY Magnetism, and Phase Criticality*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01125 "Beyond Conventional Pairing: Bosonic Quartic Superfluidity, Exotic XY Magnetism, and Phase Criticality")
Chenrong Liu, Zhi Lin
We report two unprecedented bosonic quartic superfluid (BQSF) phases in binary boson mixtures with synthetic pair-hopping (SPH) interaction realizable through Floquet engineering, transcending the conventional bosonic superfluidity paradigm via high-order correlations. Through extensive numerical simulations, we demonstrate: (i) The paired super-counter-fluid (PSCF) phase that exhibits bosonic 'four-particle' correlations, directly mirroring fermionic 4e superconductivity; (ii) The symbiotic super-counter-fluid which is an anomalous quantum phase featuring intrinsically intertwined, non-zero PSCF and super-counter-fluid orders. Both phases further reveal unreported pseudo-spin-ordered XY ferromagnetic states with filling-dependent magnetization textures. Adjacent to BQSF phases, we uncover both a previously unreported quantum quadruple critical point induced by interexchange asymmetry and SPH-driven state-dependent criticality-the latter exhibiting distinct behavior from conventional two-component bosonic systems. We propose momentum-resolved noise correlation spectroscopy-building on established quantum gas microscopy techniques-as a direct probe for the characteristic signatures of these BQSF states. Our results establish a new paradigm in quantum matter, opening unprecedented avenues to explore (i) quartic quantum coherence, (ii) emergent collective phenomena, and (iii) extended XY magnetism-resolving a longstanding classification challenge while discove

[73]. [*Collapse of density wave and emergence of superconductivity in pressurized-La$_4$Ni$_3$O$_{10}$ evidenced by ultrafast spectroscopy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05176 "Collapse of density wave and emergence of superconductivity in pressurized-La$_4$Ni$_3$O$_{10}$ evidenced by ultrafast spectroscopy")
Shuxiang Xu, Hao Wang, Mengwu Huo, Deyuan Hu, Qiong Wu, Li Yue, Dong Wu, Meng Wang, Tao Dong, Nanlin Wang
Recent discoveries of superconductivity in Ruddlesden-Popper nickelates realize a rare category of superconductors. However, the use of high-pressure diamond anvil cells limits spectroscopic characterization of the density waves and superconducting gaps. Here, we systematically studied the pressure evolution of La$_{4}$Ni$_{3}$O$_{10}$ using ultrafast optical pump-probe spectroscopy. We found that the transition temperature and energy gap of density waves are suppressed with increasing pressure and disappear suddenly near 17 GPa where structural transition appears. In addition, the observation of a single density wave gap indicates that the spin density wave and charge density wave remain coupled as pressure increases, rather than decoupling. After the density wave collapse, a distinct low-temperature regime emerges, characterized by a small gap consistent with potential superconducting pairing. The separated phase region of superconductivity and density waves suggests that superconductivity in pressurized-La$_4$Ni$_3$O$_{10}$ competes strongly with density waves, offering new insights into the interplay between these two phenomena.

[74]. [*Angular Dependence of Specific Heat and Magnetization Effects in the Kitaev Model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.06801 "Angular Dependence of Specific Heat and Magnetization Effects in the Kitaev Model")
Takao Morinari, Hibiki Takegami
We investigate the effect of a magnetic field on the Kitaev model using the equation of motion approach for the spin Green's function, considering both the case of suppressed magnetization ($m = 0$) and finite magnetization ($m \neq 0$). When magnetization is suppressed, the specific heat exhibits a clear 60^\circ$ periodicity in its angular dependence, with the locations of maxima and minima consistent with recent experimental observations in $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$. A qualitative difference in their temperature dependence is observed: the minima show gap-like behavior that may signal Majorana gap formation due to time-reversal symmetry breaking, while the maxima do not exhibit the expected gapless Majorana fermion signature. In addition, a linear-in-field effect -- distinct from magnetization -- emerges, with the characteristic temperature below which angular dependence appears increasing linearly with the magnetic field. Importantly, this directional dependence becomes quantitatively significant only at very low temperatures. When finite magnetization is included, the angular dependence of the specific heat remains, and the qualitative behavior is similar to the $m = 0$ case: the minima continue to exhibit gap-like features, while the maxima do not show signatures of gapless Majorana fermions. These results suggest that suppressing magnetization alone is insufficient to realize quantum spin liquid behavior in the Kitaev model under a magnetic field.

[75]. [*Exceptional Non-Hermitian Topology Associated with Non-Toroidal Brillouin Zones*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.06933 "Exceptional Non-Hermitian Topology Associated with Non-Toroidal Brillouin Zones")
W. B. Rui, Z. D. Wang
Exceptional points (EPs) are prominent non-Hermitian band degeneracies that give rise to a variety of intriguing and unconventional phenomena. Similar to Weyl and Dirac points, EPs carry topological charges and comply with the celebrated fermion doubling theorems in lattices. Beyond these characteristics, EPs exhibit more exotic topological properties, particularly non-Abelian braiding topologies not seen in conventional degeneracies. Here, we investigate these foundational concepts of EPs in two-dimensional non-Hermitian lattices where the fundamental domain of the Brillouin zone is a Klein bottle, rather than a torus assumed in previous studies. We find that EPs do not necessarily appear in pairs with opposite topological charges in the Brillouin Klein bottle, thus violating the fermion doubling theorem. The violation occurs because, without crossing the boundary, the sum of the topological charges of EPs is in fact an even number rather than zero. Moreover, we uncover unique braiding topologies of EPs that cannot be captured by existing theories. Specifically, the composite braidings around all EPs equals the braiding along the boundary of the Brillouin Klein bottle. This novel braiding topology further confirms the failure of the fermion doubling theorem, and allows us to explore the non-Abelian braidings of EPs beyond the scope of topological charges. Our work highlights the fundamental role of Brillouin-zone topology in non-Hermitian systems.

[76]. [*Imaging Ultrafast Dynamical Diffraction wavefronts of femtosecond laser-induced lattice distortions inside crystalline semiconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10420 "Imaging Ultrafast Dynamical Diffraction wavefronts of femtosecond laser-induced lattice distortions inside crystalline semiconductors")
Angel Rodr\'iguez-Fern\'andez, Jan-Etienne Pudell, Roman Shayduk, Wonhyuk Jo, James Wrigley, Johannes M\"oller, Peter Zalden, Alexey Zozulya, J\"org Hallmann, Anders Madsen, Pablo Villanueva-Perez, Zdenek Matej, Thies J. Albert, Dominik Kaczmarek, Klaus Sokolowski-Tinten, Antonowicz Jerzy, Ryszard Sobierajski, Rahimi Mosafer, Oleksii I. Liubchenko, Javier Solis, Jan Siegel
Material processing with femtosecond lasers has attracted enormous attention because of its potential for technology and industrial applications. In parallel, time-resolved x-ray diffraction has been successfully used to study ultrafast structural distortion dynamics in semiconductor thin films or surface layers. However, real-world processing applications mostly are concerned with bulk materials, which prevents the use of x-ray surface based techniques. For processing applications, a fast and depth-sensitive probe is needed. To address this, we present a novel technique based on ultrafast x-ray dynamical diffraction (UDD) capable of imaging transient strain distributions inside bulk crystals upon laser excitation. This pump-probe technique provides a complete picture of thetemporal evolution of ultrafast distorted lattice depth profiles. We demonstrate the potential of UDD by studying a thin Si single crystal upon single pulse femtosecond optical excitation. Our study reveals that below the melting threshold strong lattice distortions not only longitudinal, but also transversal to the propagation of the strain wave appear on picosecond time scales along the single crystal. The observation of this transversal deformation after laser excitation contradicts previous work that were not able to observed it, what could be related to the high sensitivity of dynamical diffraction with respect to the lattice distortions. The speed of propagation of this ultrafast transversal strain deformation is observed to be slower to the longitudinal sound speed for Si as described in the bibliography.

[77]. [*Direction-dependent linear response for gapped nodal-line semimetals in planar-Hall configurations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10712 "Direction-dependent linear response for gapped nodal-line semimetals in planar-Hall configurations")
Fasil Hussain Rather, Firdous Haidar, Muhammed Jaffar A., Ipsita Mandal
We compute the magnetoelectric conductivity for ideal nodal-line semimetals (NLSMs), with a finite but tiny mass-gap, in distinct planar-Hall set-ups. Each differing configuration results from the relative orientation of the nodal-ring's plane with respect to the plane spanned by the electric ($\mathbf E $) and magnetic ($\mathbf B$) fields. The net conductivity tensor has components comprising the Drude, anomalous-Hall, in-plane (with $\mathbf E$ and $\mathbf B$) longitudinal and transverse, and Lorentz-force-operator-induced parts. Our results feature the signatures of the inherent topology of a gapped NLSM, revealed through nonzero values of the Berry curvature and the orbital magnetic moment. In particular, we show that both of these vector fields, arising in the momentum space, give rise to terms of comparable magnitudes in the resulting response. Our explicit theoretical expressions will help identify unique signatures of NLSMs in contemporary experiments.

[78]. [*Simulation of current-driven magnetisation switching in nanopillars with Perpendicular Shape Anisotropy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15388 "Simulation of current-driven magnetisation switching in nanopillars with Perpendicular Shape Anisotropy")
Natalia Boscolo Meneguolo, Daria Gusakova, Jean-Christophe Toussaint, Mouad Fattouhi, Ioan-Lucian Prejbeanu, Olivier Fruchart
The Perpendicular Shape Anisotropy Spin Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (PSA-STT-MRAM) is a recent concept proposed to maintain the thermal stability of standard MRAM at small diameters, considering thick vertical pillars as the free layer. In order to explore the specific physics of PSA-STT-MRAMs expected in relation with their three-dimensional nature, we have performed simulations combining a micromagnetic model coupled self-consistently with spin-dependent transport equations. The 3D shape induces flower states at the upper and lower surfaces. Besides, the field-like component of STT is found to be larger than in standard MRAMs, suggesting that it needs to be considered. The combination of both effects leads to the excitation of high-order 3D ferromagnetic resonance modes, playing a key role in magnetisation reversal. These results highlight features of 3D nanomagnetic systems, largely disregarded so far, which need to be considered to optimise PSA-STT-MRAM to be a competitive solution for technological implementation.

[79]. [*Explicit core-hole single-particle methods for L- and M- edge X-ray absorption and electron energy-loss spectra*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08458 "Explicit core-hole single-particle methods for L- and M- edge X-ray absorption and electron energy-loss spectra")
Esther A. B. Johnsen, Naoki Horiuchi, Toma Susi, Michael Walter
Single-particle methods based on Kohn-Sham unoccupied states to describe near-edge X-ray absorption (XAS) spectra are routinely applied for the description of K-edge spectra, as there is no complication due to spin-orbit (SO) coupling. L- and M-edge spectra are often addressed via variants of time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) based on SO calculations. Here, we present a computationally efficient implementation based on single-particle calculations with core holes within the frozen-core approximation. Combined with a semiempirical energy shift and a fixed spin-orbit splitting for each core level, this allows for a computationally cheap, while overall accurate prediction of experimental spectra on the absolute energy scale. The spectra are compared to about 40 times slower linear-response TDDFT calculations for molecules and show similar or even better match with experiment. An exception are multiplet effects that we analyze in detail and show that they cannot be covered by a single-particle approximation. A similar picture emerges for solids, where good qualitative and sometimes even quantitative agreement to experimental XAS and electron energy-loss spectra is achieved.

[80]. [*Quantitative measurements of transverse thermoelectric generation and cooling performances in SmCo$_5$/Bi$_{0.2}$Sb$_{1.8}$Te$_3$-based artificially tilted multilayer module*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13051 "Quantitative measurements of transverse thermoelectric generation and cooling performances in SmCo$_5$/Bi$_{0.2}$Sb$_{1.8}$Te$_3$-based artificially tilted multilayer module")
Masayuki Murata, Fuyuki Ando, Takamasa Hirai, Hiroto Adachi, Ken-ichi Uchida
The transverse thermoelectric generation and cooling performances in a thermopile module composed of recently developed SmCo$_5$/Bi$_{0.2}$Sb$_{1.8}$Te$_3$ artificially tilted multilayers are evaluated quantitatively. When a large temperature difference of 405 $^\circ$C is applied to the SmCo$_5$/Bi$_{0.2}$Sb$_{1.8}$Te$_3$-based module, the open-circuit voltage and output power reach 0.51 V and 0.80 W, respectively. The corresponding maximum power density is 0.16 W/cm$^2$, even if the power is normalized by the device area including areas that do not contribute to the power generation, such as epoxy resin, electrodes, and insulating layers. The maximum energy conversion efficiency for our module in this condition is experimentally determined to be 0.92%. Under the cooling operation, the same module exhibits the maximum temperature difference of 9.0 $^\circ$C and heat flow at the cold side of 1.6 W. Although these values are lower than the ideal thermoelectric performance expected from the material parameters due to the imperfections associated with modularization, the systematic investigations reported here clarify a potential of the SmCo$_5$/Bi$_{0.2}$Sb$_{1.8}$Te$_3$ artificially tilted multilayers as thermoelectric generators and cooling devices.

[81]. [*Stainless steel in an electronically excited state*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19798 "Stainless steel in an electronically excited state")
Nikita Medvedev
Understanding the non-equilibrium behavior of stainless steel under extreme electronic excitation remains a critical challenge for laser processing and radiation science. We employ a hybrid framework integrating density-functional tight binding, transport Monte Carlo, and Boltzmann equations to model austenitic stainless steel (Fe$_{0.5875}$Cr$_{0.25}$Mn$_{0.09}$Ni$_{0.07}$C$_{0.0025}$) under ultrafast irradiation. The developed approach uniquely bridges atomic-scale electronic dynamics and mesoscale material responses, enabling the quantitative mapping of electron-temperature-dependent properties (electronic heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and electron-phonon coupling) up to the electronic temperatures Te~25,000 K. Two distinct lattice disordering mechanisms are identified: nonthermal melting at Te~10,000 K (the dose ~1.4 eV/atom), where the lattice collapses on sub-picosecond timescales without atomic heating driven by electronic excitation modifying the interatomic potential; and thermal melting (at ~0.45 eV/atom), induced by electron-phonon coupling on picosecond timescales. The derived parameters enable predictive modeling of stainless steel under extreme conditions, with implications for laser machining and radiation-resistant material design.

[82]. [*Electronic structure and exchange interactions in altermagnetic MnGeP$_2$ in the quasiparticle-self-consistent $GW$ approach*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02934 "Electronic structure and exchange interactions in altermagnetic MnGeP$_2$ in the quasiparticle-self-consistent $GW$ approach")
Ilteris K. Turan, Walter R L. Lambrecht, Jerome Jackson
The QS$GW$ method is used to study the electronic band structure, optical dielectric function, and exchange interactions in chalcopyrite, $I\bar{4}2d$, structure MnGeP$_2$. The material is found to be an antiferromagnetic semiconductor with the lowest direct gap of 2.44 eV at the $\Gamma$ point and an indirect gap of 1.87 eV. The material is an altermagnet, with the two magnetic atoms of opposite spin related by a two-fold rotation operation perpendicular to the main 4-fold rotation inversion axis. The spin splittings along a low symmetry line like $PN$ are sizable, while at k-points on the diagonal mirror planes or on the twofold symmetry axes, the spin splitting is zero. The exchange interactions are calculated using a linear response approach. The antiferromagnetic exchange-interaction between nearest neighbors in the primitive unit cell is dominating and found to be slightly decreasing upon carrier doping. The transverse spin susceptibilities, which provide interatomic site exchange interactions after averaging over the muffin-tin spheres, are calculated from the $GW$ band structure and wave functions. From these exchange interactions, the spin wave spectra are obtained along the high symmetry lines and the N\'{e}el temperature is calculated using the mean-field and Tyablikov (RPA) estimations. The dielectric function and the optical absorption spectra are calculated, including excitonic effects, using the Bethe-Salpeter equation. The exchange interactions around Mn$_{\rm Ge}$ defect sites are also studied. While we find it can generate ferromagnetic interactions with neighboring spins, we did not find evidence of producing an overall ferromagnetic phase. If Mn antisites are introduced by exchanging Mn with a nearby Ge, the interactions stay largely antiferromagnetic. Adding Mn antisites leads to a metallic band structure.

[83]. [*Mapping of Microstructure Transitions during Rapid Alloy Solidification Using Bayesian-Guided Phase-Field Simulations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07752 "Mapping of Microstructure Transitions during Rapid Alloy Solidification Using Bayesian-Guided Phase-Field Simulations")
Jos\'e Mancias, Brent Vela, Juan Fl\'orez-Coronel, Rouhollah Tavakoli, Douglas Allaire, Raymundo Arr\'oyave, Damien Tourret
This study addresses microstructure selection mechanisms in rapid solidification, specifically targeting the transition from cellular/dendritic to planar interface morphologies under conditions relevant to additive manufacturing. We use a phase-field model that quantitatively captures solute trapping, kinetic undercooling, and morphological instabilities across a broad range of growth velocities ($V$) and thermal gradients ($G$), and apply it to a binary Fe-Cr alloy, as a surrogate for 316L stainless steel. By combining high-fidelity phase-field simulations with a Gaussian Process-based Bayesian active learning approach, we efficiently map the microstructure transitions in the multi-dimensional space of composition, growth velocity, and temperature gradient. We compare our PF results to classical theories for rapid solidification. The classical KGT model yields an accurate prediction of the value of $G$ above which the interface is planar for any growth velocity. Microstructures transition from dendrites to cells as the temperature gradient increases close to this value of $G$. We also identify the occurrence of unstable "intermediate" microstructures at the border between dendritic and planar at low $G$, in the absence of banding instability in this Fe-Cr alloy. Our results highlight the capabilities of Bayesian-guided PF approaches in exploring complex microstructural transitions in multidimensional parameters spaces, thereby providing a robust computational tool for designing process parameters to achieve targeted microstructures and properties in rapidly solidified metallic alloys.

[84]. [*Agentic Information Theory: Ergodicity and Intrinsic Semantics of Information Processes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19275 "Agentic Information Theory: Ergodicity and Intrinsic Semantics of Information Processes")
James P. Crutchfield, Alexandra Jurgens
We develop information theory for the temporal behavior of memoryful agents moving through complex -- structured, stochastic -- environments. We introduce and explore information processes -- stochastic processes produced by cognitive agents in real-time as they interact with and interpret incoming stimuli. We provide basic results on the ergodicity and semantics of the resulting time series of Shannon information measures that monitor an agent's adapting view of uncertainty and structural correlation in its environment.

[85]. [*Thermodynamic properties of CrMnFeCoNi high entropy alloy at elevated electronic temperatures*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23171 "Thermodynamic properties of CrMnFeCoNi high entropy alloy at elevated electronic temperatures")
Nikita Medvedev
The Cantor alloy (equiatomic CrMnFeCoNi) is a high-entropy alloy with unique physical properties and radiation resistance. To model its response to intense laser pulses, the parameters of the electronic ensemble are required. In this work, the electronic heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and electron-phonon coupling strength at elevated electronic temperatures are evaluated using a combined approach that incorporates tight-binding molecular dynamics and the Boltzmann equation. The damage threshold fluence is estimated for a wide range of photon energies, from XUV to hard X-rays. It is found that at the electronic temperatures ~24,000 K (absorbed dose ~6 eV/atom), the Cantor alloy experiences nonthermal melting due to modification of the interatomic potential induced by electronic excitation, even without the increase of the atomic temperature. This effect must be included in reliable models of CrMnFeCoNi ablation under ultrafast laser irradiation.

[86]. [*Generating single- and many-body quantum magnonic states*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05971 "Generating single- and many-body quantum magnonic states")
Violet Williams, Jayakrishnan M. P. Nair, Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, Benedetta Flebus
The growing interest in quantum magnonics is driving the development of advanced techniques for generating, controlling, and detecting non-classical magnonic states. Here, we explore the potential of an ensemble of solid-state spin defects coupled to a shared magnetic bath as a source of such states. We establish a theoretical framework to characterize the quantum correlations among magnons emitted by the ensemble into the bath and investigate how these correlations depend on experimentally tunable parameters. Our findings show that the emitted magnons retain the quantum correlations inherent to the solid-state emitters, paving the way for the deterministic generation of quantum many-body magnonic states.

[87]. [*Strongly correlated altermagnet CaCrO$_3$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.14081 "Strongly correlated altermagnet CaCrO$_3$")
Zhenfeng Ouyang, Peng-Jie Guo, Rong-Qiang He, Zhong-Yi Lu
Altermagnetism, a newly discovered magnetic phase, has spurred growing research activity. Studies from a perspective of dynamical electronic correlation still remain scarce. Employing density functional theory plus dynamical mean-field theory (DFT+DMFT) that incorporates dynamical electronic correlation, we demonstrate that CaCrO$_3$ is a strongly correlated altermagnet. Our DFT+DMFT calculations successfully reproduce the correlated metallic behavior of CaCrO$_3$ and quantitatively capture the incoherent state observed experimentally. We also identify that the altermagnetic CaCrO$_3$ is a Hund's metal. The incoherent state is attributed to Hund's coupling, which gives rise to a non-Fermi liquid behavior. Moreover, we find that altermagnetism can induce flat bands, and these incipient flat bands are further promoted by the strong renormalization from Hundness, which further drives a heavy-fermion behavior. Hence, we establish CaCrO$_3$ as a strongly correlated altermagnet and propose that Hund's metals provide an ideal platform for investigating the interplay between electronic correlation and altermagnetism. Our work will promote the study of strongly correlated altermagnetism physics.

[88]. [*Hamiltonian parameter inference from RIXS spectra with active learning*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16021 "Hamiltonian parameter inference from RIXS spectra with active learning")
Marton K. Lajer, Xin Dai, Kipton Barros, Matthew R. Carbone, S. Johnston, M. P. M. Dean
Identifying model Hamiltonians is a vital step toward creating predictive models of materials. Here, we combine Bayesian optimization with the EDRIXS numerical package to infer Hamiltonian parameters from resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) spectra within the single atom approximation. To evaluate the efficacy of our method, we test it on experimental RIXS spectra of NiPS3, NiCl2, Ca3LiOsO6, and Fe2O3, and demonstrate that it can reproduce results obtained from hand-fitted parameters to a precision similar to expert human analysis while providing a more systematic mapping of parameter space. Our work provides a key first step toward solving the inverse scattering problem to extract effective multi-orbital models from information-dense RIXS measurements, which can be applied to a host of quantum materials. We also propose atomic model parameter sets for two materials, Ca3LiOsO6 and Fe2O3, that were previously missing from the literature.

[89]. [*Nonequilibrium transport through an interacting monitored quantum dot*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20779 "Nonequilibrium transport through an interacting monitored quantum dot")
Daniel Werner, Matthieu Vanhoecke, Marco Schir\`o, Enrico Arrigoni
We study the interplay between strong correlations and Markovian dephasing, resulting from monitoring the charge or spin degrees of freedom of a quantum dot described by a dissipative Anderson impurity model. Using the Auxiliary master equation approach we compute the steady-state spectral function and occupation of the dot and discuss the role of dephasing on Kondo physics. Furthermore, we consider a two-lead setup which allows to compute the steady-state current and conductance. We show that the Kondo steady-state is robust to moderate charge dephasing but not to spin dephasing, which we interpret in terms of dephasing-induced heating of low-energy excitations. Finally, we show universal scaling collapse of the non-linear conductance with a dephasing-dependent Kondo scale.

[90]. [*Spatially-periodic states in a strongly dipolar $^{164}$Dy-$^{162}$Dy mixture*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.22154 "Spatially-periodic states in a strongly dipolar $^{164}$Dy-$^{162}$Dy mixture")
S. K. Adhikari
We demonstrate the formation of a novel eigenstate in a strongly dipolar binary $^{164}$Dy-$^{162}$Dy mixture, where the inter- and intraspecies dipolar lengths are larger than the corresponding scattering lengths. When this mixture is confined by a quasi-two-dimensional harmonic trap, the total density exhibits the formation of droplets on a spatially-symmetric triangular or square lattice, where each droplet is formed of a single species of atoms; two types of atoms never exist on the same lattice site. The density of any of the species shows a partially-filled incomplete lattice, only the total density exhibits a completely full lattice structure. In this theoretical investigation we employ the numerical solution of an improved mean-field model including a Lee-Huang-Yang-type interaction in the intraspecies components alone, meant to stop a collapse of the atoms at high atom density.

[91]. [*Broadband ferromagnetic resonance in Ni-Mn-Ga single crystal*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.22600 "Broadband ferromagnetic resonance in Ni-Mn-Ga single crystal")
Lud\v{e}k Kraus, Denys Musiienko, Martin Kempa, Jaroslav \v{C}apek
We present a broadband ferromagnetic resonance study in single crystalline Ni$_{50}$Mn$_{28.1}$Ga$_{21.9}$ in the temperature range from room temperature to 120 {\deg}C in which the transformation from martensite to austenite phase takes place. Our measurements demonstrate that a large change (an order of magnitude) in the magnetocrystalline anisotropy at the martensitic phase transformation results in a sharp change of the resonance magnetic field. In a single variant martensite phase, the resonance fields satisfy the Kittel's resonance condition for a thin film with the gyromagnetic factor g = 2.0. With the magnetic field parallel to the easy c-axis of the single variant martensite, the resonance is observed only for frequencies larger than 22 GHz. For the multivariant martensite case, the magnetic coupling between the twin variants can be taken into account for the satisfactory Kittel's fit. We observe a weak magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the austenite phase, just above the reverse martensite transformation, comparable to the previous reports based on different magnetic measurements.

[92]. [*Configurational density of states of power-law potentials and the virial theorem in steady states*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.22624 "Configurational density of states of power-law potentials and the virial theorem in steady states")
Sergio Davis
In this brief note, the configurational density of states of a system of particles interacting via power-law pair potentials is computed exactly. The result is consistent with a constant microcanonical heat capacity. The well-known form of the virial theorem for this class of systems is recovered using only the obtained configurational density of states, and shown to be valid beyond the canonical and microcanonical ensembles, in general steady states.

[93]. [*Topological quantum thermometry*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.14524 "Topological quantum thermometry")
Anubhav Kumar Srivastava, Utso Bhattacharya, Maciej Lewenstein, Marcin P{\l}odzie\'n
An optimal local quantum thermometer is a quantum many-body system that saturates the fundamental lower bound for the thermal state temperature estimation accuracy [L. Correa, et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 220405 (2015)]. Such a thermometer has a particular energy level structure with a single ground state and highly degenerated excited states manifold, with an energy gap proportional to the estimated temperature. In this work, we show that the optimal local quantum thermometer can be realized in an experimentally feasible system of spinless fermions confined in a one-dimensional optical lattice described by the Rice-Mele model. We characterize the system's sensitivity to temperature changes in terms of quantum Fisher information and the classical Fisher information obtained from experimentally available site occupation measurements.

[94]. [*Polynomially restricted operator growth in dynamically integrable models*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13026 "Polynomially restricted operator growth in dynamically integrable models")
Igor Ermakov, Tim Byrnes, Oleg Lychkovskiy
We provide a framework to determine the upper bound to the complexity of a computing a given observable with respect to a Hamiltonian. By considering the Heisenberg evolution of the observable, we show that each Hamiltonian defines an equivalence relation, causing the operator space to be partitioned into equivalence classes. Any operator within a specific class never leaves its equivalence class during the evolution. We provide a method to determine the dimension of the equivalence classes and evaluate it for various models, such as the $ XY $ chain and Kitaev model on trees. Our findings reveal that the complexity of operator evolution in the $XY$ model grows from the edge to the bulk, which is physically manifested as suppressed relaxation of qubits near the boundary. Our methods are used to reveal several new cases of simulable quantum dynamics, including a $XY$-$ZZ$ model which cannot be reduced to free fermions.

[95]. [*Observation of anomalous information scrambling in a Rydberg atom array*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16174 "Observation of anomalous information scrambling in a Rydberg atom array")
Xinhui Liang, Zongpei Yue, Yu-Xin Chao, Zhen-Xing Hua, Yige Lin, Meng Khoon Tey, Li You
Quantum information scrambling, which describes the propagation and effective loss of localinformation, is crucial for understanding the dynamics of quantum many-body systems. We report the observation of anomalous information scrambling in an atomic tweezer array with dominant van der Waals interaction. We characterize information spreading by an out-of-time-order correlator and observe persistent oscillations inside a suppressed linear light cone for the initial Neel state. Such an anomalous dynamic, which differs from both generic thermal and many-body localized scenarios, originates from weak ergodicity breaking in quantum many-body scarred systems.

[96]. [*Block-corrected Modularity for Community Detection*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20083 "Block-corrected Modularity for Community Detection")
Hasti Narimanzadeh, Takayuki Hiraoka, Mikko Kivel\"a
Unknown node attributes in complex networks may introduce community structures that are important to distinguish from those driven by known attributes. We propose a block-corrected modularity that discounts given block structures present in the network to reveal communities masked by them. We show analytically how the proposed modularity finds the community structure driven by an unknown attribute in a simple network model. Further, we observe that the block-corrected modularity finds the underlying community structure on a number of simple synthetic network models while methods using different null models fail. We develop an efficient spectral method as well as two Louvain-inspired fine-tuning algorithms to maximize the proposed modularity and demonstrate their performance on several synthetic network models. Finally, we assess our methodology on various real-world citation networks built using the OpenAlex data by correcting for the temporal citation patterns.

[97]. [*Quantifying two-mode entanglement of bosonic Gaussian states from their full counting statistics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09555 "Quantifying two-mode entanglement of bosonic Gaussian states from their full counting statistics")
Victor Gondret, Clothilde Lamirault, Rui Dias, Charlie Leprince, Christoph I. Westbrook, David Cl\'ement, Denis Boiron
We study the entanglement properties of two-mode bosonic Gaussian states based on their multi-mode counting statistics. We exploit the idea that measuring high-order correlations of particle numbers can reveal entanglement without making any assumptions about the coherence of the fields. We show that the two- and four-body number correlations are sufficient to fully characterize the entanglement of two-mode bosonic Gaussian states for which each mode exhibits a thermal distribution. In addition, we derive an entanglement witness based on two-body correlations alone. Our findings are of great importance because it becomes possible to reveal entanglement in a series of recent experiments.

[98]. [*Exactly solvable models for universal operator growth*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03435 "Exactly solvable models for universal operator growth")
Oleksandr Gamayun, Murtaza Ali Mir, Oleg Lychkovskiy, Zoran Ristivojevic
Quantum observables of generic many-body systems exhibit a universal pattern of growth in the Krylov space of operators. This pattern becomes particularly manifest in the Lanczos basis, where the evolution superoperator assumes the tridiagonal form. According to the universal operator growth hypothesis, the nonzero elements of the superoperator, known as Lanczos coefficients, grow asymptotically linearly. We introduce and explore broad families of Lanczos coefficients that are consistent with the universal operator growth and lead to the exactly solvable dynamics. Within these families, the subleading terms of asymptotic expansion of the Lanczos sequence can be controlled and fine-tuned to produce diverse dynamical patterns. For one of the families, the Krylov complexity is computed exactly.

[99]. [*Symmetry Transmutation and Anomaly Matching*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08618 "Symmetry Transmutation and Anomaly Matching")
Nathan Seiberg, Sahand Seifnashri
We explore a situation where a global symmetry of the ultraviolet (UV) theory does not act faithfully on the local infrared (IR) degrees of freedom, but instead acts effectively as a higher-form symmetry. We refer to this phenomenon as symmetry transmutation, where the UV symmetry is "transmuted" into a higher-form symmetry in the IR. Notably, unlike emergent (accidental) symmetries, which are approximate, these symmetries are exact. We illustrate the ubiquity of this phenomenon in various continuum and lattice systems and provide examples where the 't Hooft anomalies of the UV symmetry are matched by those of the new higher-form symmetry in the IR. We also show that in certain phases and for certain energies, the UV baryon-number symmetry of one-flavor QCD is transmuted into a discrete one-form global symmetry. Finally, we compare our symmetry transmutation to the well-known phenomenon of symmetry fractionalization.

[100]. [*Remarkable similarities in distributions of dynamical observables in chaotic systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09225 "Remarkable similarities in distributions of dynamical observables in chaotic systems")
Lucianno Defaveri, Naftali R. Smith
The study of chaotic systems, where rare events play a pivotal role, is essential for understanding complex dynamics due to their sensitivity to initial conditions. Recently, tools from large deviation theory, typically applied in the context of stochastic processes, have been used in the study of chaotic systems. Here, we study dynamical observables, $A = \sum_{n=1}^N g(\textbf{x}_n)$, defined along a chaotic trajectory $\{\textbf{x}_1, \textbf{x}_2, \ldots, \textbf{x}_N\}$. For most choices of $g(\textbf{x})$, $A$ satisfies a central limit theorem: At large sequence size $N \gg 1$, typical fluctuations of $A$ follow a Gaussian distribution with a variance that scales linearly with $N$. Large deviations of $A$ are usually described by the large deviation principle, that is, $P(A) \sim e^{- N I(A/N)}$, where $I(a)$ is the rate function. We find that certain dynamical observables exhibit a remarkable statistical similarity: even when constructed with distinct functions $g_1(\textbf{x})$ and $g_2(\textbf{x})$, different observables are described by the same rate function. We provide a physical interpretation for this striking similarity by showing that $g_1(\textbf{x})-g_2(\textbf{x})$ belongs to a class of functions that we call ``derived''. Furthermore, we show that if $g(\textbf{x})$ itself is ``derived'', then the distribution of $A$ becomes independent of $N$ in the large-$N$ limit, and is generally non-Gaussian (although it is mirror-symmetric). We demonstrate that the position observable for certain open maps, used to model random walks and the finite-time Lyapunov exponent (FTLE) for the logistic map are of this derived form, thus providing a simple explanation for some existing results.

[101]. [*Time-tagging data acquisition system for testing superconducting electronics based on an RFSoC and custom analog frontend*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.21714 "Time-tagging data acquisition system for testing superconducting electronics based on an RFSoC and custom analog frontend")
Reed A. Foster, Stephen Kandeh, Owen Medeiros, Alejandro Simon, Matteo Castellani, Karl K. Berggren
Novel electronic devices can often be operated in a plethora of ways, which makes testing circuits comprised of them difficult. Often, no single tool can simultaneously analyze the operating margins, maximum speed, and failure modes of a circuit, particularly when the intended behavior of subcomponents of the circuit is not standardized. This work demonstrates a cost-effective time-domain data acquisition system for electronic circuits that enables more intricate verification techniques than are practical with conventional experimental setups. We use high-speed digital-to-analog converters and real-time multi-gigasample-per-second waveform processing to push experimental circuits beyond their maximum operating speed. Our custom time-tagging data capture firmware reduces memory requirements and can be used to determine when errors occur. The firmware is combined with a thermal-noise-limited analog frontend with \ensuremath{{50}\,\mathrm{dB}} of dynamic range. Compared to currently available commercial test equipment that is seven times more expensive, this data acquisition system was able to operate a superconducting shift register at a nearly three-times-higher clock frequency (${200}\,\mathrm{MHz}$ vs. ${80}\,\mathrm{MHz}$)

[102]. [*Probing graph topology from local quantum measurements*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23689 "Probing graph topology from local quantum measurements")
F. Romeo, J. Settino
We show that global properties of an unknown quantum network, such as the average degree, hub density, and the number of closed paths of fixed length, can be inferred from strictly local quantum measurements. In particular, we demonstrate that a malicious agent with access to only a small subset of nodes can initialize quantum states locally and, through repeated short-time measurements, extract sensitive structural information about the entire network. The intrusion strategy is inspired by extreme learning and quantum reservoir computing and combines short-time quantum evolution with a non-iterative linear readout with trainable weights. These results suggest new strategies for intrusion detection and structural diagnostics in future quantum Internet infrastructures.

