[1]. [*Novel entangled dimer state in the Shastry-Sutherland magnet Yb$_2$Be$_2$SiO$_7$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00766 "Novel entangled dimer state in the Shastry-Sutherland magnet Yb$_2$Be$_2$SiO$_7$")
A. Brassington, Q. Ma, G. Duan, S. Calder, A. I. Kolesnikov, K. M. Taddei, G. Sala, H. Wang, W. Xie, B. A. Frandsen, N. Li, X. F. Sun, C. Liu, R. Yu, H. D. Zhou, A. A. Aczel
The Shastry-Sutherland lattice (SSL) magnet, with antiferromagnetic intradimer and interdimer Heisenberg exchange, is known to host an antisymmetric singlet ground state when the intradimer exchange is dominant. Rare-earth-based SSL systems with strong spin-orbit coupling offer the opportunity for tuning their magnetic properties by using magnetic anisotropy as a control knob. Here, we present bulk characterization and neutron scattering measurements of the SSL material Yb$_2$Be$_2$SiO$_7$. We find that the Yb$^{3+}$ ions can be described by an effective spin-1/2 model at low temperatures and the system does not show signs of magnetic order down to 50 mK. The magnetization, heat capacity, and neutron spectroscopy data can be well-described by an isolated dimer model with highly anisotropic exchange that stabilizes a singlet ground state with the symmetric wavefunction up/up - down/down. Our results show that strong spin-orbit coupling can induce novel entangled states of matter on the SSL.

[2]. [*Anisotropic Spin Ice on a Breathing Pyrochlore Lattice*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00767 "Anisotropic Spin Ice on a Breathing Pyrochlore Lattice")
Gloria Isbrandt, Frank Pollmann, Michael Knap
Spin ice systems represent a prime example of constrained spin systems and exhibit rich low-energy physics. In this study, we explore how introducing a tunable anisotropic spin coupling to the conventional Ising spin ice Hamiltonian on the breathing pyrochlore lattice affects the ground state properties of the system. Significant changes are observed in the ground state structure, reflected in the spin structure factor and in a reduction of residual entropy at low temperatures. We theoretically uncover a rich phase diagram by varying the anisotropy and demonstrate how this modification reduces the ground state degeneracy across different phases. Numerical simulations reveal that, at sufficiently low temperatures, the system either undergoes a crossover into a constrained spin ice manifold, characterized by an entropy density that drops below the Pauling entropy of conventional spin ice, or a phase transition into a symmetry-broken state, depending on the perturbations. Additionally, we compute the spin structure factors for the anisotropic model and compare these results to analytical predictions from a large-$N$ expansion, finding good agreement. This work develops the understanding of spin ice in anisotropic limits, which may be experimentally realized by strain, providing, among others, key signatures in entropy and specific heat.

[3]. [*Real-space orbital tiling approach for the design of novel superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00771 "Real-space orbital tiling approach for the design of novel superconductors")
Gregory Bassen, Wyatt Bunstine, Rebecca Han, Ragy Ebeid, Eli Zoghlin, Tyrel M. McQueen
Despite substantial advances in the field, we still lack a predictive framework capable of guiding the discovery of new families of superconductors. While momentum-space approaches have advanced the microscopic understanding of superconductivity, they offer limited guidance for materials design based on atomic building blocks. Here, we propose a real-space framework which conceptualizes Cooper pairs as confined standing waves resulting from coherent tilings of atomic orbitals. We call this model the Real-space Orbital Superconducting Pathway (ROSP). Using a tight-binding toy model, we show that the energetics of electron pairing depend on the configuration and overlap of real-space orbitals, which motivates \textit{a priori} design of superconducting families from orbital tiling. We connect the ROSP model to Roald Hoffmann's isolobal analogy to classify families of superconductors based on shared orbital tilings, rather than structure or electron count. As an example, we suggest that superconductivity in La$_{3}$Ni$_{2}$O$_{7}$ and LaNiO$_{2}$, despite differing structures and electron counts, may arise from a common ROSP. We introduce a new notation to classify two-dimensional square-net ROSPs and further propose several new families of superconductors on the anti-cuprate lattice. This framework provides a new model for predicting and designing families of high-T$_c$ superconductors from real-space orbital architecture, even without microscopic knowledge of the attractive pairing interaction.

[4]. [*Free-energy perturbation in the exchange-correlation space accelerated by machine learning: Application to silica polymorphs*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00789 "Free-energy perturbation in the exchange-correlation space accelerated by machine learning: Application to silica polymorphs")
Axel Forslund, Jong Hyun Jung, Yuji Ikeda, Blazej Grabowski
We propose a free-energy-perturbation approach accelerated by machine-learning potentials to efficiently compute transition temperatures and entropies for all rungs of Jacob's ladder. We apply the approach to the dynamically stabilized phases of SiO$_2$, which are characterized by challengingly small transition entropies. All investigated functionals from rungs 1-4 fail to predict an accurate transition temperature by 25-200%. Only by ascending to the fifth rung, within the random phase approximation, an accurate prediction is possible, giving a relative error of 5%. We provide a clear-cut procedure and relevant data to the community for, e.g., developing and evaluating new functionals.

[5]. [*Beyond kagome: $p$-bands in kagome metals*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00796 "Beyond kagome: $p$-bands in kagome metals")
Alexander A. Tsirlin, Ece Uykur
We review recent studies on quantum materials where transition-metal atoms give rise to $d$-bands typical of kagome metals. Using examples from several material families - AV$_3$Sb$_5$, FeGe, RV$_6$Sn$_6$, and LaRu$_3$Si$_2$ - we argue that $p$-bands contributed by elements beyond the kagome network also play a crucial role in the electronic instabilities, including the charge-density-waves and superconductivity in kagome metals.

[6]. [*Dynamical Cluster Approximation for Disordered Systems with Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00806 "Dynamical Cluster Approximation for Disordered Systems with Rashba Spin-Orbit Coupling")
Yongtai Li, Gour Jana, Chinedu E. Ekuma
We present an extension of the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) that incorporates Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) to investigate the interplay between disorder and SOC on a two-dimensional square lattice. By analyzing the average density of states and the self energy, we demonstrate how Rashba SOC modifies single-particle properties in the presence of nonlocal spatial correlations captured by DCA. The return probability exhibits signatures of SOC induced delocalization at finite times. To assess the accuracy of our approach, we benchmark the DCA results against those obtained from the numerically exact kernel polynomial method. The good agreement between the two methods validates the use of the computationally efficient, mean-field-based DCA framework for studying disordered systems with SOC.

[7]. [*On recovering intragranular strain fields from grain-averaged strains obtained by high-energy X-ray diffraction microscopy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00834 "On recovering intragranular strain fields from grain-averaged strains obtained by high-energy X-ray diffraction microscopy")
C. K. Cocke, A. Akerson, S. F. Gorske, K. T. Faber, K. Bhattacharya
We address an unusual problem in the theory of elasticity motivated by the problem of reconstructing the strain field from partial information obtained using X-ray diffraction. Referred to as either high-energy X-ray diffraction microscopy~(HEDM) or three-dimensional X-ray diffraction microscopy~(3DXRD), these methods provide diffraction images that, once processed, commonly yield detailed grain structure of polycrystalline materials, as well as grain-averaged elastic strains. However, it is desirable to have the entire (point-wise) strain field. So we address the question of recovering the entire strain field from grain-averaged values in an elastic polycrystalline material. The key idea is that grain-averaged strains must be the result of a solution to the equations of elasticity and the overall imposed loads. In this light, the recovery problem becomes the following: find the boundary traction distribution that induces the measured grain-averaged strains under the equations of elasticity. We show that there are either zero or infinite solutions to this problem, and more specifically, that there exist an infinite number of kernel fields, or non-trivial solutions to the equations of elasticity that have zero overall boundary loads and zero grain-averaged strains. We define a best-approximate reconstruction to address this non-uniqueness. We then show that, consistent with Saint-Venant's principle, in experimentally relevant cylindrical specimens, the uncertainty due to non-uniqueness in recovered strain fields decays exponentially with distance from the ends of the interrogated volume. Thus, one can obtain useful information despite the non-uniqueness. We apply these results to a numerical example and experimental observations on a transparent aluminum oxynitride (AlON) sample.

[8]. [*Intrinsic Chern Half-Metal with High Anomalous Hall Conductivity in 2D BaNiCl$_3$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00840 "Intrinsic Chern Half-Metal with High Anomalous Hall Conductivity in 2D BaNiCl$_3$")
Chidiebere I. Nwaogbo, Chinedu E. Ekuma
Two-dimensional (2D) half-metals offer complete spin polarization at the Fermi level, making them candidates for dissipationless spin transport. Yet intrinsic 2D half-metals exhibiting robust topological features, particularly large Chern number anomalous Hall conductivities, remain exceptionally rare. Using first-principles calculations, we identify atomically thin BaNiCl$_3$, a layered halide perovskite (perovskene), as a topological half-metal. It exhibits a high Chern number ($C \ge 2$), a large anomalous Hall conductivity of 316~$\Omega^{-1},\mathrm{cm}^{-1}$, and a Fermi velocity of $\approx 0.78 \times 10^6$ m/s. The coexistence of complete spin polarization and high carrier velocity suggests low-dissipation spin transport. Spin-orbit coupling opens a sizable topological gap of $\sim 20\,$ meV, yielding nontrivial Berry curvature and enhancing the anomalous Hall response. Ferromagnetism is stabilized by the Ni$^{2+}$ ($d^8$) configuration and Cl-mediated superexchange, supporting magnetic ordering at elevated temperatures. These results establish BaNiCl$_3$ as a rare intrinsic Chern half-metal, with potential applications in quantum and spintronic technologies.

[9]. [*Quantum Monte Carlo assessment of embedding for a strongly-correlated defect: interplay between mean-field and interactions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00845 "Quantum Monte Carlo assessment of embedding for a strongly-correlated defect: interplay between mean-field and interactions")
Kevin G. Kleiner, Sonali Joshi, Woncheol Lee, Alexander Hampel, Malte R\"osner, Cyrus E. Dreyer, Lucas K. Wagner
Point defects are of interest for many applications, from quantum sensing to modifying bulk properties of materials. Because of their localized orbitals, the electronic states are often strongly correlated, which has led to a proliferation of quantum embedding techniques to treat this correlation. In these techniques, a weakly correlated reference such as density functional theory is used to treat most of the one-particle states, while certain states are singled out as an active space to be treated with an effective interaction. We assess these techniques in the context of an iron defect in aluminum nitride by referencing to a fully correlated quantum Monte Carlo description. This comparison allows us to have access to detailed information about the many-body wave functions, which are not available experimentally. We find that errors in the underlying density functional theory calculation, and thus choice of the active space, lead to qualitatively incorrect excited states from the embedded model. These errors are extremely difficult to recover from by adding corrections such as double counting or many-body perturbation theory.

[10]. [*The dynamical law behind eye movements: distinguishing between L\'evy and intermittent strategies*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00864 "The dynamical law behind eye movements: distinguishing between L\'evy and intermittent strategies")
Pedro Lencastre, Yurii Bystryk, Anis Yazidi, Sergey Denisov, Pedro G. Lind
Foraging is a complex spatio-temporal process which is often described with stochastic models. Two particular ones, L\'evy walks (LWs) and intermittent search (IS), became popular in this context. Researchers from the two communities, each advocating for either L\'evy or intermittent approach, independently analyzed foraging patterns and reported agreement between empirical data and the model they used. We resolve this L\'evy-intermittent dichotomy for eye-gaze trajectories collected in a series of experiments designed to stimulate free foraging for visual information. By combining analytical results, statistical quantifiers, and basic machine learning techniques, we devise a method to score the performance of the models when they are used to approximate an individual gaze trajectory. Our analysis indicates that the intermittent search model consistently yields higher scores and thus approximates the majority of the eye-gaze trajectories better.

[11]. [*Composition-dependent ultrafast luminescence in Cu-Ni alloys: Combined experimental and ab initio study*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00905 "Composition-dependent ultrafast luminescence in Cu-Ni alloys: Combined experimental and ab initio study")
Tohru Suemoto, Haruki Morino, Shota Ono, Tsuyoshi Okuno, Takeshi Suzuki, Kozo Okazaki, Shuntaro Tani, Yohei Kobayashi
Properties of Cu-Ni solid solutions have long been studied in physical and materials sciences. Yet, their many-body properties have not been well understood. Here, we investigate ultrafast luminescence in near infrared region for Cu$_{1-x}$Ni$_x$ alloys. The luminescence intensity was the highest in Cu and decreased dramatically by adding Ni, approaching close to the value for pure Ni at $x=0.45$. This composition dependence was well reproduced by calculations assuming two body scattering of the energetic electrons. The luminescent decay rate was not straightforward, i.e., it decreased first by adding Ni up to $x=0.17$ and then started to increase approaching twice the initial value at $x=0.45$. This behavior was in good agreement with ab initio calculations of electron-phonon (e-ph) coupling strength. This work provides a new perspective on the electron relaxation dynamics in solid solutions systems.

[12]. [*Magnetic excitons in non-magnetic CrCl3*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00920 "Magnetic excitons in non-magnetic CrCl3")
Georgy Ermolaev, Tagir Mazitov, Anton Minnekhanov, Arslan Mazitov, Gleb Tselikov, Aleksandr Slavich, Alexey P. Tsapenko, Mikhail Tatmyshevskiy, Mikhail Kashchenko, Nikolay Pak, Andrey Vyshnevyy, Alexander Melentev, Elena Zhukova, Dmitriy Grudinin, Junhua Luo, Ivan Kruglov, Aleksey Arsenin, Sangen Zhao, Kostya S. Novoselov, Andrey Katanin, Valentyn S. Volkov
Van der Waals (vdW) materials, with their unique combination of electronic, optical, and magnetic properties, are emerging as promising platforms for exploring excitonic phenomena. Thus far, the choice of materials with exceptional excitonic response has been limited to two-dimensional (2D) configurations of vdW materials. At the same time, large interlayer distance and the possibility to create a variety of heterostructures offers an opportunity to control the dielectric screening in van der Waals heterostructures and van der Waal 3D materials, thus engineering the excitonic properties. Here, we reveal that bulk vdW crystal CrCl3 answers this quest with a record exciton binding energy of 1.64 eV owing to a delicate interplay of quasi-2D electronic confinement and short-range magnetic correlations. Furthermore, we observe colossal binding energies in vdW crystals NbOCl2 (0.66 eV) and MoCl3 (0.35 eV) and formulate a universal exciton binding energy dependence on bandgap for 2D and 3D vdW materials. Hence, our findings establish a fundamental link between the layered structure of vdW materials and their excitonic properties.

[13]. [*Projectification of point group symmetries with a background flux and Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00927 "Projectification of point group symmetries with a background flux and Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem")
Yasuhiro Tada, Masaki Oshikawa
We discuss the Lieb-Schultz-Mattis (LSM) theorem in two-dimensional spin systems with on-site ${\mathrm U}(1)\rtimes {\mathbb Z}_2$ spin rotation symmetry and point group $C_{2v}$ symmetry about a site. We ``twist" the point group symmetry by introducing a small uniform U(1) flux to obtain a projective symmetry, similarly to the familiar magnetic translation symmetry. The LSM theorem is proved in presence of the flux and then it is demonstrated that the theorem holds also for the flux-free system. Besides, the uniform flux enables us to show the LSM theorem for the time-reversal symmetry and the site-centered $C_2$-rotation symmetry.

[14]. [*Sensitivity enhancement of an anomalous Hall effect magnetic sensor by means of second-order magnetic anisotropy*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00955 "Sensitivity enhancement of an anomalous Hall effect magnetic sensor by means of second-order magnetic anisotropy")
Hiroko Arai, Hiroshi Imamura
The sensing performance of anomalous Hall effect (AHE) magnetic sensors is investigated in terms of their sensitivity, the power spectrum of their voltage noise, and their detectivity. Special attention is paid to the effect of the second-order anisotropy constant, K2, on the sensing performance. It is found that the sensitivity is strongly enhanced by tuning the value of K2 close to the boundary between the in-plane magnetized state and the conically magnetized state. It is also found that the detectivity is almost independent of K2 as long as the film is in-plane magnetized. These results provide fundamental insights into the design of high-performance AHE sensors.

[15]. [*Current-induced Dynamics of Bloch Domain-wall Bimerons*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00959 "Current-induced Dynamics of Bloch Domain-wall Bimerons")
Jiwen Chen, Laichuan Shen, Yan Zhou, Oleg A. Tretiakov, Xiaoguang Li
Domain-wall bimerons are composite topological structures formed by embedding bimerons within domain walls in ferromagnets with in-plane anisotropy. These hybrid textures have recently attracted significant attention due to their promise for racetrack memory applications. In this work, we systematically investigate the current-driven dynamics of single domain-wall bimerons and bimeron chains under spin-transfer torque (STT) and spin-orbit torque (SOT). We show that when the spin current is injected or polarized perpendicular to the domain wall, the bimeron Hall effect facilitates efficient motion along the wall. In contrast, spin currents injected or polarized parallel to the wall suppress transverse motion, leading to a significant reduction in the bimeron Hall angle. This anisotropic response is observed for both STT and SOT driving mechanisms. Furthermore, we find that increasing the number of bimerons within a domain wall diminishes their collective mobility. These results provide key insights into domain-wall bimeron dynamics and offer guidance for their integration into bimeron-based spintronic devices.

[16]. [*Non-Hermitian Haldane-Hubbard model: Effective description of an open system with balanced gain and loss*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00964 "Non-Hermitian Haldane-Hubbard model: Effective description of an open system with balanced gain and loss")
Tian-Cheng Yi, Rubem Mondaini
We study the correlated Haldane-Hubbard model with single-particle gain and loss, focusing on its non-Hermitian phase diagram and the ensuing non-unitary dynamic properties. The interplay of interactions and non-hermiticity results in insulating behavior with a phase diagram divided into three distinct regions, exhibiting either topologically gapped or (real) gapless regimes and a trivial phase. The latter is mapped by the emergence of a local order parameter associated with a charge density wave. A ${\cal PT}$-symmetry breaking at the low-lying spectrum occurs when increasing the gain-loss magnitude at a fixed interaction strength, marking the transition from gapped to gapless topological behavior. Further increase leads to the onset of charge ordering in a first-order phase transition in which level crossing takes place in the spectrum's imaginary part. The support that the staggered gain and loss display to robust charge density wave in equilibrium is confirmed in the real-time dynamics in the presence of non-hermiticity, suggesting that engineered gain and loss can be used to tailor an ordered many-body state in experiments.

[17]. [*Bulk excitations in ultraclean $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$: Quantitative evidence for Majorana dispersions in a Kitaev quantum spin liquid*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00971 "Bulk excitations in ultraclean $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$: Quantitative evidence for Majorana dispersions in a Kitaev quantum spin liquid")
Kumpei Imamura, Ryuichi Namba, Riku Ishioka, Kota Ishihara, Yuji Matsuda, Seunghun Lee, Eun-Gook Moon, Kenichiro Hashimoto, Takasada Shibauchi
The spin-orbit coupled Mott insulator $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$ has emerged as a prime candidate for realizing the Kitaev quantum spin liquid (KQSL), characterized by Majorana quasiparticles, whose edge states exhibit a distinctive half-integer quantized thermal Hall conductivity. However, its van der Waals nature makes its thermal Hall response highly sensitive to structural disorder, leading to sample-dependent variations. Here, we investigate low-energy bulk excitations in the field-induced quantum disordered (FIQD) state of newly available ultraclean single crystals of $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$. High-resolution specific heat measurements under in-plane magnetic field rotation reveal an anisotropic excitation gap, whose field dependence is consistent with the Majorana gap in the KQSL state. Remarkably, when the field aligns with Ru-Ru bond directions, we observe gapless excitations with Dirac-like dispersions that quantitatively match theoretical predictions of Majorana bands based on the reported Kitaev interactions. Our findings in these ultraclean crystals provide strong evidence that the FIQD state of $\alpha$-RuCl$_3$ is a robust KQSL, resilient against small disorder perturbations.

[18]. [*Graph Neural Network-based structural classification of glass-forming liquids and its interpretation via Self-Attention mechanism*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00993 "Graph Neural Network-based structural classification of glass-forming liquids and its interpretation via Self-Attention mechanism")
Kohei Yoshikawa, Kentaro Yano, Shota Goto, Kang Kim, Nobuyuki Matubayasi
Glass-forming liquids exhibit slow dynamics below their melting temperatures, maintaining an amorphous structure reminiscent of normal liquids. Distinguishing microscopic structures in the supercooled and high-temperature regimes remains a debated topic. Building on recent advances in machine learning, particularly Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), our study automatically extracts features, unveiling fundamental mechanisms driving structural changes at varying temperatures. We employ the Self-Attention mechanism to generate attention coefficients that quantify the importance of connections between graph nodes, providing insights into the rationale behind GNN predictions. Exploring structural changes with decreasing temperature through the GNN+Self-Attention using physically-defined structural descriptors, including the bond-orientational order parameter, Voronoi cell volume, and coordination number, we identify strong correlations between high attention coefficients and more disordered structures as a key indicator of variations in glass-forming liquids.

[19]. [*Chirality-selective proximity effect between chiral $p$-wave superconductors and quantum Hall insulators*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00994 "Chirality-selective proximity effect between chiral $p$-wave superconductors and quantum Hall insulators")
Ryota Nakai, Koji Kudo, Hiroki Isobe, Kentaro Nomura
Heterostructures of superconductors and quantum-Hall insulators are promising platforms of topological quantum computation. However, these two systems are incompatible in some aspects such as a strong magnetic field, the Meissner effect, and chirality. In this work, we address the condition that the superconducting proximity effect works in the bulk of quantum Hall states, and identify an essential role played by the vortex lattice regardless of pairing symmetry. We extend this finding to a heterostructure of a chiral $p$-wave superconductor in the mixed state and an integer quantum Hall insulator. The proximity effect works selectively in the lowest Landau level depending on relative chiralities. If the chiralities align, a topological phase transition to a topological superconductor occurs.

[20]. [*Quasi-local Frustration-Free Free Fermions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01010 "Quasi-local Frustration-Free Free Fermions")
Shunsuke Sengoku, Hoi Chun Po, Haruki Watanabe
Recent studies have revealed that frustration-free models, expressed as sums of finite-range interactions or hoppings, exhibit several properties markedly different from those of frustrated models. In this work, we demonstrate that, by relaxing the finite-range condition to allow for exponentially decaying hoppings, one can build gapped frustration-free systems that realize Chern insulators as well as quasi-degenerate ground states with finite-size splittings. Moreover, by permitting power-law decaying hoppings, we also construct a gapless band metal whose finite-size gap scales inversely with the system size $L$. These findings serve as an important step toward clarifying the general properties of frustration-free systems and those represented by tensor network states.

[21]. [*Excitation spectrum of vortex-lattice modes in a rotating condensate with a density-dependent gauge potential*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01031 "Excitation spectrum of vortex-lattice modes in a rotating condensate with a density-dependent gauge potential")
Rony Boral, Swarup K. Sarkar, Matthew Edmonds, Paulsamy Muruganandam, Pankaj Kumar Mishra
We investigate the collective excitation spectrum of a quasi-2D Bose-Einstein condensate trapped in a harmonic confinement with nonlinear rotation induced by a density-dependent gauge field. Using a Bogoliubov-de Gennes(BdG) analysis, we show that the dipole mode frequency depends strongly on the nonlinear interaction strength, violating Kohn's theorem. Further utilizing the variational analysis, we derive analytical expressions for the dipole and breathing modes, which suggests a strong dependence of the condensate's width on the nonlinear rotation resulting from the density-dependent gauge potential. We identify four different vortex displacement modes -- namely Tkachenko, circular, quadratic, and rational-whose frequencies are sensitive to the nonlinear rotation. In addition to the numerical analysis, we also derive an analytical expression for the Tkachenko mode frequency using a Hydrodynamic approach that agrees well with the frequencies obtained by the Fourier analysis of the transverse and longitudinal vortex dynamics induced by a Gaussian perturbation as well as the frequencies from the BdG excitation spectrum. Our findings also reveal that the excitation spectrum remain symmetric around the angular quantum number $l=0$, with modified energy splitting between $l$ and $-l$ as the nonlinear rotation changes from negative to positive values. Finally, we demonstrate that the surface mode excitation frequency increases (decreases) with an increase in the positive (negative) nonlinear rotation strength.

[22]. [*Raman spectroscopy of anyons in generic Kitaev spin liquids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01042 "Raman spectroscopy of anyons in generic Kitaev spin liquids")
Aprem P. Joy, Achim Rosch
Optical probes have emerged as versatile tools for detecting exotic fractionalized phases in quantum materials. We calculate the low-energy Raman response arising from mobile, interacting Ising anyons (or visons) in the chiral Kitaev spin liquid perturbed by symmetry allowed interactions - a phase relevant to \rucl. under a magnetic field. At zero temperature, the two-anyon continuum response shows a leading power-law scaling of the intensity near the onset of the signal: $I(\omega) \sim (\omega-E^0_{2\sigma})^{\frac{1}{8}}$ for linear and parallel-circular polarization channels, where $E^0_{2\sigma}$ is the two-particle gap. Strong corrections due to short-range interactions arise at order $\frac{1}{4}$. For cross-circularly polarized channels, the scaling is given by $I(\omega) \sim (\omega-E^0_{2\sigma})^{|l\pm 1/8|}$, where the value of $l=0,1,2$ is determined by the number of minima in the single anyon dispersion. The exponents are directly related to the topological spin of Ising anyons $\theta_\sigma =\frac{\pi}{8}$, describing their exchange statistics. Our theory generalizes to spectral probes of anyonic quasiparticles with multiple band minima in other quantum liquids. Interaction between anyons may also induce bound-states, resulting in sharp peaks that show strong polarization dependence.

[23]. [*Kinetic roughening transition of ice crystals and its implications during recrystallization*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01055 "Kinetic roughening transition of ice crystals and its implications during recrystallization")
Jorge H. Melillo, Ido Braslavsky
The growth and morphology of ice crystals are highly sensitive to environmental conditions. Under atmospheric pressure, rapid growth from the liquid phase produces dendritic structures with sixfold symmetry. This morphology results from subtle variations in surface tension linked to crystallographic orientation, which guides arm growth under supercooled conditions. In contrast, slow growth yields disk-shaped crystals with rounded surfaces, suggesting surface roughness on all but the basal planes. Roughening is a thermodynamic phenomenon where a crystal surface becomes non-faceted due to the absence of a step-edge barrier, leading to large surface fluctuations. A kinetic roughening transition is a temperature-dependent shift in growth behaviour, in which faceted surfaces at low temperatures transform into rounded surfaces at higher temperatures. To observe slow growth at low temperatures, supercooling must be minimized, which can be achieved by lowering the melting point. This study investigates the kinetic roughening transition in ice crystals grown in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and proline-water solutions. Using cryomicroscopy and real-time image analysis, we identified a distinct roughening transition temperature (TR = -15.4 oC). At TR, the crystal growth morphology shifted from circular disks at higher temperatures to hexagonal plates at lower temperatures. This transition was solute-independent and governed primarily by temperature. Ice consistently melted as circular disks, regardless of temperature. Recrystallization experiments confirmed that crystals grew as hexagonal plates below TR but melted as disks. We also examined the influence of antifreeze protein III (AFPIII), which binds to specific crystallographic planes and modifies morphology through a distinct mechanism, effectively suppressing kinetic roughening

[24]. [*Coarse-grained graph architectures for all-atom force predictions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01058 "Coarse-grained graph architectures for all-atom force predictions")
Sungwoo Kang
We introduce a machine-learning framework termed coarse-grained all-atom force field (CGAA-FF), which incorporates coarse-grained message passing within an all-atom force field using equivariant nature of graph models. The CGAA-FF model employs grain embedding to encode atomistic coordinates into nodes representing grains rather than individual atoms, enabling predictions of both grain-level energies and atom-level forces. Tested on organic electrolytes, CGAA-FF achieves root-mean-square errors of 4.96 meV atom-1 for energy and 0.201 eV A-1 for force predictions. CGAA-FF significantly reduces computational costs, achieving about 22- and 14-fold improvements in simulation speed and memory efficiency, respectively, compared to the all-atom potential (SevenNet-0). Since this CGAA framework can be integrated into any equivariant architecture, we believe this work opens the door to efficient all-atom simulations of soft-matter systems.

[25]. [*In-Situ Growth and Ionic Switching Behavior of Single-Crystalline Silver Iodide Nanoflakes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01062 "In-Situ Growth and Ionic Switching Behavior of Single-Crystalline Silver Iodide Nanoflakes")
Amir Parsi, Abdulsalam Aji Suleiman, Doruk Pehlivano\u{g}lu, Hafiz Muhammad Shakir, Emine Ye\u{g}in, T. Serkan Kas{\i}rga
Silver iodide (AgI) is a prototypical superionic conductor, undergoing a first-order phase transition at 147 Celsius that enables rapid ionic transport through its lattice, making it attractive for solid-state ionic devices. However, due to the presence of mobile Ag ions, controlled chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis of high-quality AgI single crystals has remained largely unexplored. Here, we present the controllable synthesis of thin, single-crystalline {\beta}-AgI nanoflakes using a home-built CVD setup with real-time optical observation capability, offering insights into their nucleation and growth dynamics. We evaluate the material's environmental stability through temperature-dependent photodegradation and Ag nanoparticle formation induced by electron beam irradiation. Electrical measurements on two-terminal devices with silver contacts demonstrate a remarkable six-order-of-magnitude resistance drop in lateral configurations at elevated temperatures, indicative of switchable ionic conductivity. Additionally, vertical device architectures exhibit clear memristive (resistive switching) characteristics, likely due to the formation of conductive filaments. Our work addresses the key synthesis challenges and highlights the unique electrical properties of thin AgI single crystals, suggesting its potential for innovative devices in unconventional computing, data storage, and advanced neuromorphic systems.

[26]. [*Interplay of asymmetry and fragmentation in the many-body tunneling dynamics of two-dimensional bosonic Josephson junctions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01069 "Interplay of asymmetry and fragmentation in the many-body tunneling dynamics of two-dimensional bosonic Josephson junctions")
Anal Bhowmik, Rhombik Roy, Sudip Kumar Haldar
It is well known that the many-body tunneling of a bosonic condensate leads to (longitudinal) fragmentation along the tunneling direction. In this work, we prepare the initial ground state as a (transversely) fragmented system by introducing a barrier oriented orthogonally to the tunneling direction and allow it to tunnel through a two-dimensional longitudinally and transversely-asymmetric bosonic Josephson junctions. For a fixed barrier height, we find that the initial transversal fragmentation is essentially independent of the asymmetry along the tunneling direction but reduces when the asymmetry is oriented orthogonally to the junction. We investigate the interplay between the interference of fragmentations and asymmetry in the junction by analyzing the rate of density collapse in the survival probability, the uncertainty product, and the nontrivial dynamics of the occupation of the first excited orbital. The interference of fragmentations is quantified by the ratio between the reduction of transverse fragmentation and the development of longitudinal fragmentation. We show that asymmetry along the junction (orthogonal to the junction) delays (accelerates), compared to the symmetric potential, in obtaining the maximal interference of fragmentations. Notably, self-trapping opposes the interference, whereas a resonant tunneling condition enhances it. Overall, we demonstrate that the influence of asymmetry on the competition between longitudinal and transversal fragmentations, which together govern the macroscopic tunneling dynamics of interacting bosons, arises purely from the many-body effects and has no counterpart in the mean-field theory.

[27]. [*Quantum geometric ferromagnetism by singular saddle point*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01089 "Quantum geometric ferromagnetism by singular saddle point")
Taisei Kitamura, Hiroki Nakai, Akito Daido, Youichi Yanase
We propose ferromagnetism that occurs in electrons at a saddle point with band touching, which we call the singular saddle point. At the singular saddle point, the divergent quantum metric induces ferromagnetic correlation, and the logarithmic divergence of the density of states ensures ferromagnetism within Stoner theory. This is a prototypical example of quantum geometric ferromagnetism. The two-dimensional $t_{2g}$-orbital model accommodates the ferromagnetism by this mechanism, which is continuously connected to the exactly proven flat-band ferromagnetism.

[28]. [*Snakes in the Plane: Controllable Gliders in a Nanomagnetic Metamaterial*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01116 "Snakes in the Plane: Controllable Gliders in a Nanomagnetic Metamaterial")
Arthur Penty, Johannes H. Jensen, Ida Breivik, Anders Str{\o}mberg, Erik Folven, Gunnar Tufte
The magnetic metamaterials known as Artificial Spin Ice (ASI) are promising candidates for neuromorphic computing, composed of vast numbers of interacting nanomagnets arranged in the plane. Every computing device requires the ability to transform, transmit and store information. While ASI excel at data transformation, reliable transmission and storage has proven difficult to achieve. Here, we take inspiration from the Cellular Automaton (CA), an abstract computing model reminiscent of ASI. In CAs, information transmission and storage can be realised by the ``glider'', a simple structure capable of propagating while maintaining its form. Employing an evolutionary algorithm, we search for gliders in pinwheel ASI and present the simplest glider discovered: the ``snake''. Driven by a global field protocol, the snake moves strictly in one direction, determined by its orientation. We demonstrate the snake, both in simulation and experimentally, and analyse the mechanism behind its motion. The snake provides a means of manipulating a magnetic texture in an ASI with resolution on the order of 100 nm, which could in turn be utilised to precisely control other magnetic phenomena. The integration of data transmission, storage and modification into the same magnetic substrate unlocks the potential for ultra-low power computing devices.

[29]. [*On Simulating Thin-Film Processes at the Atomic Scale Using Machine Learned Force Fields*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01118 "On Simulating Thin-Film Processes at the Atomic Scale Using Machine Learned Force Fields")
S. Kondati Natarajan, J. Schneider, N. Pandey, J. Wellendorff, S. Smidstrup
Atomistic modeling of thin-film processes provides an avenue not only for discovering key chemical mechanisms of the processes but also to extract quantitative metrics on the events and reactions taking place at the gas-surface interface. Molecular dynamics (MD) is a powerful computational method to study the evolution of a process at the atomic scale, but studies of industrially relevant processes usually require suitable force fields, which are in general not available for all processes of interest. However, machine learned force fields (MLFF) are conquering the field of computational materials and surface science. In this paper, we demonstrate how to efficiently build MLFFs suitable for process simulations and provide two examples for technologically relevant processes: precursor pulse in the atomic layer deposition of HfO2 and atomic layer etching of MoS2.

[30]. [*Family-Vicsek universality of the binary intrinsic dimension of nonequilibrium data*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01119 "Family-Vicsek universality of the binary intrinsic dimension of nonequilibrium data")
Roberto Verdel, Devendra Singh Bhakuni, Santiago Acevedo
The intrinsic dimension (ID) is a powerful tool to detect and quantify correlations from data. Recently, it has been successfully applied to study statistical and many-body systems in equilibrium. Yet, its application to systems away from equilibrium remains largely unexplored. Here we study the ID of nonequilibrium growth dynamics data, and show that even after reducing these data to binary form, their binary intrinsic dimension (BID) retains essential physical information. Specifically, we find that, akin to the surface width, it exhibits Family-Vicsek dynamical scaling -- a fundamental feature to describe universality in surface roughness phenomena. These findings highlight the ability of the BID to correctly discern key properties and correlations in nonequilibrium data, and open an avenue for alternative characterizations of out-of-equilibrium dynamics.

[31]. [*The thermodynamic uncertainty relation of a quantum-mechanically coupled two-qubit system*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01121 "The thermodynamic uncertainty relation of a quantum-mechanically coupled two-qubit system")
Kwang Hyun Cho, Hyukjoon Kwon, Changbong Hyeon
The minimal bound of the thermodynamic uncertainty relation (TUR) is modulated from that of the classical counterpart ($\mathcal{Q}_{\rm min}=2$) when a quantumness is present in the dynamical process far from equilibrium. A recent study on a dissipative two-level system (TLS) subject to an external field indicates that quantum coherences can suppress the fluctuations of the irreversible current and loosens the TUR bound to $\mathcal{Q}_{\rm min}^{\rm TLS}\approx 1.25$. Here, we extend on the field-driven single TLS to a quantum-mechanically coupled two-qubit system (TQS), and explore, in addition to the single qubit coherence, how the quantum coupling between the two qubits affects the photon current, fluctuations, and the TUR bound. We find that the TUR bound of TQS depends on the strength of coupling, such that $\mathcal{Q}_{\rm min}^{\rm TQS}=\mathcal{Q}_{\rm min}^{\rm TLS}\approx 1.25$ when the two qubits are effectively decoupled under weak coupling, whereas another loose bound $\mathcal{Q}_{\rm min}^{\rm TQS}\approx 1.36$ is identified for two strongly coupled qubits under strong fields. By contrasting the TQS against two coupled noisy oscillators, we illuminate the quantumness unique to the TQS and its effect on the TUR.

[32]. [*Towards a critical endpoint in the valence fluctuating Eu(Rh$_{1-x}$Co$_{x}$)$_2$Si$_2$ system*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01127 "Towards a critical endpoint in the valence fluctuating Eu(Rh$_{1-x}$Co$_{x}$)$_2$Si$_2$ system")
Franziska Walther, Michelle Ocker, Alexej Kraiker, Nubia Caroca-Canales, Silvia Seiro, Kristin Kliemt, Cornelius Krellner
We report on the successful single crystal growth of pure EuRh${_2}$Si${_2}$ and of Eu(Rh$_{1-x}$Co$_{x}$)$_2$Si$_2$ with $x\leq0.23$ by the flux method. Through Co substitution, EuRh$_2$Si$_2$ can be tuned from stable antiferromagnetism via a valence-transition state towards the valence-crossover regime. From magnetization measurements, we constructed a $B - T$ phase diagram for EuRh${_2}$Si${_2}$ comprising multiple magnetic phases and showing a sizable magnetic anisotropy within the basal plane of the tetragonal unit cell. This indicates a complex antiferromagnetic ground state for $x=0$. By applying positive chemical pressure through the substitution series Eu(Rh$_{1-x}$Co$_{x}$)$_2$Si$_2$, a sharp temperature-induced first-order phase transition is observed in magnetization, resistivity and heat capacity for 0.081 $\leq$ $x$ $\leq$ 0.119. The critical end point of this valence transition is located in the phase diagram in the vicinity of 0.119 $<$ 0.166. At higher substitution level, the system reaches a valence-crossover regime. The obtained results are presented in a temperature-substitition phase diagram.

[33]. [*Topological pump and its plateau transitions of $N$-leg spin ladder*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01153 "Topological pump and its plateau transitions of $N$-leg spin ladder")
Kota Yamamoto, Yoshihito Kuno, Tomonari Mizoguchi, Kazuki Sone, Yasuhiro Hatsugai
A topological pump on an $N\textrm{-}$leg spin ladder is discussed by introducing spatial clusterization whose adiabatic limit is a set of $2N\textrm{-}$site staircase clusters. We set a pump path in the parameter space that connects two different symmetry protected topological phases. By introducing a symmetry breaking staggered magnetic field, the system is always gapped during the pump. In the topological pump {thus obtained}, the bulk Chern number is given by the number of the critical points enclosed by the pump path. Plateau transitions characterized by the Chern number are demonstrated associated with deformation of the pump path. We find that there are $N$ critical points enclosed by the pump path for the $N\textrm{-}$leg ladder. The ground state phase diagram without symmetry breaking terms is numerically investigated by using the quantized Berry phase. We also discuss the physical picture of edge states in the diagonal boundary, and numerically demonstrate the bulk-edge correspondence for $N=2,3$ cases.

[34]. [*Systematic investigation of the generation of luminescent emitters in hBN via irradiation engineering*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01155 "Systematic investigation of the generation of luminescent emitters in hBN via irradiation engineering")
Pooja C. Sindhuraj, Jos\'e M. Caridad, Corn\'e Koks, Moritz Fischer, Denys I. Miakota, Juan A. Delgado-Notario, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Stela Canulescu, Sanshui Xiao, Martijn Wubs, Nicolas Stenger
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), a two-dimensional (2D) material, garners interest for hosting bright quantum emitters at room temperature. A great variety of fabrication processes have been proposed with various yields of quantum emitters. In this work, we study the influence of several parameters, such as irradiation energy, annealing environment, and the type of hBN, on the emitter density in hBN. Our results show (i) high emitter density with oxygen irradiation at 204 eV, (ii) post-annealing in carbon-rich atmospheres significantly increases emitter density, reinforcing carbon's potential role, (iii) no significant effect of oxygen pre-annealing, and (iv) a slightly increased emitter density from hBN crystals with lower structural quality. Although the precise origin of the emitters remains unclear, our study shows that oxygen irradiation and subsequent inert annealing in a carbon-rich environment play a crucial role in emitter generation, while the other processing parameters have a smaller influence. As such, our systematic study and findings show relevant advances towards the reproducible formation of visible-frequency quantum emitters in hBN.

[35]. [*Multi Moire Networks in Engineered Lateral Hetero-Bilayers: Programmable Phononic Reconfiguration and Second Harmonic Generation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01188 "Multi Moire Networks in Engineered Lateral Hetero-Bilayers: Programmable Phononic Reconfiguration and Second Harmonic Generation")
Suman Kumar Chakraborty (Quantum Materials and Device Research lab, Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal, India), Frederico B. Sousa (Departamento de F\'isica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil), Chakradhar Sahoo (Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark), Indrajeet Dhananjay Prasad (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Goa, Goa, India), Shneha Biswas (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India), Purbasha Ray (Quantum Materials and Device Research lab, Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal, India), Biswajeet Nayak (Quantum Materials and Device Research lab, Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal, India), Rafael Rojas (Departamento de F\'isica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil), Baisali Kundu (Quantum Materials and Device Research lab, Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal, India), Alfred J. H. Jones (Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark), Jill A. Miwa (Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark), S{\o}ren Ulstrup (Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark), Sudipta Dutta (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India), Santosh Kumar (Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Goa, Goa, India), Leandro M. Malard (Departamento de F\'isica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil), Gopal K. Pradhan (Department of Physics, School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, India), Prasana Kumar Sahoo (Quantum Materials and Device Research lab, Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal, India)
Moire engineering in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides enables access to correlated quantum phenomena. Realizing such effects demands simultaneous control over twist angle and material composition to modulate phonons, excitons, and their interactions. However, most studies rely on exfoliated flakes, limiting scalability and systematic exploration. Here, we demonstrate a scalable multi-moire network by vertically stacking CVD-grown monolayer lateral heterostructures. Signatures of moire non-rigidity, including phonon frequency softening, linewidth broadening, and strain localization, are attributed to two lattice relaxation modes; rotational reconstruction and volumetric dilation. Micro-angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy reveals that interfacial orbital interactions modulate interlayer coupling. At aligned angles, molybdenum diselenides exhibit reduced valley polarization and Davydov splitting, indicating strain-induced symmetry breaking and chiral phonon effects. Notably, SHG modulation was obderved with variation in twist angle due to lower coherence and band-offset-driven phase delay. First-principles calculations support these findings. This work provides a route to programmable, scalable multi-moire platforms for opto-straintronics, quantum sensing, and on-chip photonics.

[36]. [*Non-universal Impact of Cholesterol on Ionic Liquid-Membrane Interactions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01230 "Non-universal Impact of Cholesterol on Ionic Liquid-Membrane Interactions")
J. Gupta, V. K. Sharma, P. Hitaishi, A. K. Jha, J. B. Mitra, H. Srinivasan, S. Kumar, A. Kumar, S. K. Ghosh, S. Mitra
Understanding the role of cholesterol in ionic liquid (IL)-membrane interactions is essential for advancing biomedical applications of ILs, including the development of innovative antimicrobial agents. In this study, we explore the intricate and multifaceted role of cholesterol in modulating IL-membrane interactions, employing a comprehensive suite of biophysical techniques. We systematically examine how IL alkyl chain length and membrane physical state influence the impact of cholesterol on IL-lipid membrane interaction. The incorporation of ILs is shown to increase the area per lipid in both pristine dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and DPPC-cholesterol membranes. Cholesterol modulates the impact of ILs on lipid conformation, membrane viscoelasticity, and phase behavior. Small-angle neutron scattering and dynamic light scattering measurements reveal that cholesterol mitigates IL-induced structural perturbations in vesicles. Our isothermal titration calorimetry measurements reveal that the presence of cholesterol significantly weakens the binding of ILs to membranes. Intriguingly, despite this reduced binding affinity, cholesterol-containing membranes demonstrate enhanced permeabilization. This counterintuitive effect is attributed to cholesterol's ordering of lipid membranes, which increases susceptibility to stress and defects. Our results underscore the complex and non-universal interplay between lipid composition, IL alkyl chain length, and membrane phase state. These insights provide a deeper understanding of cholesterol's role in IL-membrane interactions, paving the way for the design of advanced applications of ILs in antimicrobial therapy and drug delivery.

[37]. [*Direct Evidence of Metal-Ligand Redox in Li-ion Battery Cathodes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01251 "Direct Evidence of Metal-Ligand Redox in Li-ion Battery Cathodes")
Galo J. Paez Fajardo, Daniela Dogaru, Muhammad Ans, Matthew J. W. Ogley, Veronika Majherova, Innes McClelland, Shohei Hayashida, Pascal Puphal, Masahiko Isobe, Bernhard Keimer, Pardeep K. Thakur, Tien-Lin Lee, Dave C. Grinter, Pilar Ferrer, Serena A. Cussen, Matthias Hepting, Louis F. J. Piper
Describing Li-ion battery cathodes in terms of distinct transition metal or oxygen redox regimes can lead to confusion in understanding metal-ligand hybridisation, oxygen dimerisation, and degradation. There is a pressing need to study the electronic structure of these materials and determine the role each cation and anion plays in charge compensation. Here, we employ transition metal Ledge X-ray Resonance Photoemission Spectroscopy in conjunction with Single Impurity Anderson simulations to directly evaluate the redox mechanisms in (de-)lithiated battery electrodes. This approach reconciles the redox description of two canonical cathodes -- LiMn$_{0.6}$Fe$_{0.4}$PO$_{4}$ and LiNiO$_{2}$ -- in terms of varying degrees of charge transfer using the established Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen framework, common to condensed matter physics. In LiMn$_{0.6}$Fe$_{0.4}$PO$_{4}$, we show that capacity arises due to the depopulation of metal 3d states. Whereas, in LiNiO$_{2}$, charge transfer dominates and redox occurs through the formation and elimination of ligand hole states. This work clarifies the role of oxygen in Ni-rich system and provides a framework to explain how capacity can be extracted from oxygen-dominated states in highly covalent systems without needing to invoke dimerisation.

[38]. [*Intrinsic magnetic topological insulators of the MnBi${}_2$Te${}_4$ family*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01252 "Intrinsic magnetic topological insulators of the MnBi${}_2$Te${}_4$ family")
A. Yu. Vyazovskaya, M. Bosnar, E. V. Chulkov, M. M. Otrokov
This short review appears on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of discovery of intrinsic magnetic topological insulators (MTIs) of the MnBi${}_2$Te${}_4$ family, which have attracted a great deal of attention recently. This family of materials has been discovered in attempts to increase the observation temperature of the quantum anomalous Hall effect as well as to facilitate the eventual realization of the topological magnetoelectric effect. Therefore, we first briefly introduce these effects, then describe the experimental state-of-the-art in the MTIs field just prior to MnBi${}_2$Te${}_4$ appearance, after which we discuss the basic properties of this material and its family. Finally, we overview the exciting progress made during five years of intense research in this field.

[39]. [*DFT based comparative study of the physical properties of MAlB (M = V, Ta, Mo, Nb) MAB compounds*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01306 "DFT based comparative study of the physical properties of MAlB (M = V, Ta, Mo, Nb) MAB compounds")
Jahid Hassan, M. A. Masum, Ruman Ali, Md. Enamul Haque, S. H. Naqib
MAB phases have appealing physical features that make them appropriate for a wide range of applications. Motivated by this, we present density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the structural, elastic, bonding, electronic band dispersion, acoustic behavior, phonon spectrum, various thermomechanical and optoelectronic properties of VAlB and TaAlB ternary borides for the first time. The computed ground state lattice parameters of both compounds are very consistent with experimental data. The formation enthalpy, elastic constants, and phonon dispersion calculations indicate that both compounds are chemically, mechanically, and dynamically stable, respectively. The physical parameters of VAlB and TaAlB are studied and compared with those of MoAlB and NbAlB MAB compounds.

[40]. [*Specular-Andreev reflection and Andreev interference in an Ising superconductor junction*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01330 "Specular-Andreev reflection and Andreev interference in an Ising superconductor junction")
Gaoyang Li, Sourabh Patil, Yanxia Xing, Wolfgang Belzig, Gaomin Tang
Being resilient to magnetic field, Ising superconductor serves as an exceptional platform for studying the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. In this Letter, we first explore the transport properties of a two-terminal graphene-Ising superconductor junction where mirage gaps are induced in the superconductor by an exchange field due to magnetic proximity effect. We demonstrate that the chemical potential range of graphene supporting specular-Andreev reflection at the interface is between the two mirage gaps and about twice the Ising spin-orbit coupling strength. This enhances the resilience of observing specular-Andreev reflection against graphene potential fluctuations in experiments. We further study the Andreev interference effect based on a four-terminal junction of which two terminals consist of Ising superconductors in the presence of exchange fields. Due to the finite contribution from the spin-triplet pairing, the interference can be modulated by tuning the relative orientation of the exchange fields in addition to the traditional scheme by changing superconducting phase difference and the chemical potential of the normal region.

[41]. [*Direct evidence for two-gap superconductivity in hydrogen-intercalated titanium diselenide*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01334 "Direct evidence for two-gap superconductivity in hydrogen-intercalated titanium diselenide")
Erik Piatti, Gaia Gavello, Giovanni A. Ummarino, Filip Ko\v{s}uth, Pavol Szab\'o, Peter Samuely, Renato S. Gonnelli, Dario Daghero
Transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) offer an extremely rich material platform in the exploration of unconventional superconductivity. The unconventional aspects include exotic coupling mechanisms such as the Ising pairing, a complex interplay with other electronic orders such as charge-density waves (CDWs), symmetry-breaking and topological effects, and non-trivial gap structures such as multi-gap and possible nodal phases. Among TMDs, titanium diselenide (1$T$-TiSe$_2$) is one of the most studied and debated cases. Hints to an anomalous structure of its superconducting order parameter have emerged over the years, possibly linked to its spatial texturing in real and reciprocal space due to the presence of a 2$\times$2$\times$2 CDW phase, or to a pressure-driven multi-band Fermi surface. However, a direct evidence for a non-trivial structure of the superconducting gap in this material is still lacking. In this work, we bring the first evidence for a two-gap structure in the recently-discovered H-intercalated TiSe$_2$ superconductor (with T$_c \simeq 3.6$ K) by an extensive experimental study that combines magnetotransport measurements, point-contact spectroscopy and scanning tunnel spectroscopy. We show that the temperature dependence of the upper critical field (for $\vec B \parallel c$) as well as the shape of the point-contact and tunneling spectra strongly suggest the existence of two distinct superconducting gaps, and can indeed all be fitted in a self-consistent way with the same gap amplitudes $\Delta_1 = 0.26 \pm 0.12$ meV and $\Delta_2 =0.62 \pm 0.18$ meV.

[42]. [*Tunable resonant Raman scattering with temperature in vertically aligned 2H-SnS2*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01345 "Tunable resonant Raman scattering with temperature in vertically aligned 2H-SnS2")
Atul G. Chakkar, Deepu Kumar, Ashok Kumar, Mahesh Kumar, Pradeep Kumar
Two-dimensional semiconducting materials have a wide range of applications in various fields due to their excellent properties and rich physics. Here, we report a detailed investigation of the temperature dependent Raman and Photoluminescence measurements on the vertically aligned 2H-SnS2 grown by CVD method. Our results established the tunability of the resonant Raman scattering with varying temperature, i.e. a crossover between resonance and non-resonance conditions for the current system. We also discussed the temperature as well as laser power dependence of the low frequency asymmetric Raman mode which is interlayer shear mode. Temperature dependence of the intensity of the phonon modes also manifests the tunability of the resonant Raman scattering with temperature. Our temperature dependent Photoluminescence measurement shows the strong temperature dependence of the excitonic peaks which is confirmed with laser power dependence of the Photoluminescence measurement at room temperature. Our investigation may help to design and fabricate devices based on vertically aligned 2H-SnS2 and other similar materials in future.

[43]. [*Phase-field modeling of elastic microphase separation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01389 "Phase-field modeling of elastic microphase separation")
Hamza Oudich, Pietro Carrara, Laura De Lorenzis
We propose a novel phase-field model to predict elastic microphase separation in polymer gels. To this end, we extend the Cahn-Hilliard free-energy functional to incorporate an elastic strain energy and a coupling term. These contributions are naturally obtained from a derivation that starts from an entropic elastic energy density combined with the assumption of weak compressibility, upon second-order approximation around the swollen state. The resulting terms correspond to those of a poroelastic formulation where the coupling energetic term can be interpreted as the osmotic work of the solvent within the polymer matrix. Additionally, a convolution term is included in the total energy to model non-local forces responsible for coarsening arrest. With analytical derivations in 1D and finite element computations in 2D we show that the mechanical deformation controls the composition of the stable phases, the initial characteristic length and time, the coarsening rates and the arrested characteristic length. Moreover, we demonstrate that the proposed coupling is able to predict the arrest of coarsening at a length scale controlled by the stiffness of the dry polymer. The numerical results show excellent agreement with the experimental evidence in terms of phase-separated morphology and scaling of the characteristic length with the stiffness of the dry polymer.

[44]. [*Accelerating point defect photo-emission calculations with machine learning interatomic potentials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01403 "Accelerating point defect photo-emission calculations with machine learning interatomic potentials")
Kartikeya Sharma, Antoine Loew, Haiyuan Wang, Fredrik A. Nilsson, Miguel A. L. Marques, Kristian S. Thygesen
We introduce a computational framework leveraging universal machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) to dramatically accelerate the calculation of photoluminescence (PL) spectra of atomic or molecular emitters with \emph{ab initio} accuracy. By replacing the costly density functional theory (DFT) computation of phonon modes with much faster MLIP phonon mode calculations, our approach achieves speed improvements exceeding an order of magnitude with minimal precision loss. We benchmark the approach using a dataset comprising \emph{ab initio} emission spectra of 791 color centers spanning various types of crystal point defects in different charge and magnetic states. The method is also applied to a molecular emitter adsorbed on a hexagonal boron nitride surface. Across all the systems, we find excellent agreement for both the Huang-Rhys factor and the PL lineshapes. This application of universal MLIPs bridges the gap between computational efficiency and spectroscopic fidelity, opening pathways to high-throughput screening of defect-engineered materials. Our work not only demonstrates accelerated calculation of PL spectra with DFT accuracy, but also makes such calculations tractable for more complex materials.

[45]. [*Quasiparticle Interference of Spin-Triplet Superconductors: Application to UTe$_2$*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01404 "Quasiparticle Interference of Spin-Triplet Superconductors: Application to UTe$_2$")
Hans Christiansen, Brian M. Andersen, P. J. Hirschfeld, Andreas Kreisel
Quasiparticle interference (QPI) obtained from scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is a powerful method to help extract the pairing symmetry of unconventional superconductors. We examine the general properties of QPI on surfaces of spin-triplet superconductors, where the properties of the $\vec d$-vector order parameter and topological surface bound states offer important differences from QPI on spin-singlet superconducting materials. We then apply the theory to a model specific to UTe$_2$, and compare the resulting QPI with recent STM measurements. We conclude that the two candidate Cooper pair instabilities $B_{2u}$ and $B_{3u}$ exhibit distinct features in the QPI intensity to discriminate these using the experimental data. Characteristic features of the emergent topological surface states protected by mirror symmetries provide further unique signatures to help pinpointing the pairing symmetry channel of UTe$_2$.

[46]. [*Power Laws Associated with Self-Organized Criticality: A Comparison of Empirical Data with Model Predictions*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00748 "Power Laws Associated with Self-Organized Criticality: A Comparison of Empirical Data with Model Predictions")
Markus J. Aschwanden, Felix Scholkmann
We investigate the relevance of {\sl self-organized criticality (SOC)} models in previously published empirical datasets, which includes statistical observations in astrophysics, geophysics, biophysics, sociophysics, and informatics. We study 25 interdisciplinary phenomena with five different event detection and power law fitting methods. The total number of analyzed size distributions amounts to 64 cases, of which 80\% are found to be nearly consistent ($\alpha_s=1.99\pm0.30$) with the SOC model predictions. The fractal-diffusive SOC model predicts power law slopes of $\alpha_F=(9/5)=1.80$ for the flux $F$, $\alpha_E=(5/3)\sim1.67$ for the fluence or energy $E$, and $\alpha_T=2.00$ for the avalanche duration $T$. We find that the phenomena of solar flares, earthquakes, and forest fires are consistent with the theoretical predictions, while the size distributions of other phenomena are not conclusive due to neglected background treatment, inadequacy of power law fitting range, small-number statistics, and finite-system size effects.

[47]. [*Quasiparticle-induced decoherence of a driven superconducting qubit*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00769 "Quasiparticle-induced decoherence of a driven superconducting qubit")
Mykola Kishmar, Pavel D. Kurilovich, Andrey Klots, Thomas Connolly, Igor L. Aleiner, Vladislav D. Kurilovich
We develop a theory for two quasiparticle-induced decoherence mechanisms of a driven superconducting qubit. In the first mechanism, an existing quasiparticle (QP) tunnels across the qubit's Josephson junction while simultaneously absorbing a qubit excitation and one (or several) photons from the drive. In the second mechanism, a qubit transition occurs during the non-linear absorption process converting multiple drive quanta into a pair of new QPs. Both mechanisms can remain significant in gap engineered qubits whose coherence is insensitive to QPs without the drive. Our theory establishes a fundamental limitation on fidelity of the microwave qubit operations, such as readout and gates, stemming from QPs.

[48]. [*Theory of Quasiparticle Generation by Microwave Drives in Superconducting Qubits*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00773 "Theory of Quasiparticle Generation by Microwave Drives in Superconducting Qubits")
Shoumik Chowdhury, Max Hays, Shantanu R. Jha, Kyle Serniak, Terry P. Orlando, Jeffrey A. Grover, William D. Oliver
Microwave drives are commonly employed to control superconducting quantum circuits, enabling qubit gates, readout, and parametric interactions. As the drive frequencies are typically an order of magnitude smaller than (twice) the superconducting gap, it is generally assumed that such drives do not disturb the BCS ground state. However, sufficiently strong drives can activate multi-photon pair-breaking processes that generate quasiparticles and result in qubit errors. In this work, we present a theoretical framework for calculating the rates of multi-photon-assisted pair-breaking transitions induced by both charge- and flux-coupled microwave drives. Through illustrative examples, we show that drive-induced QP generation may impact novel high-frequency dispersive readout architectures, as well as Floquet-engineered superconducting circuits operating under strong driving conditions.

[49]. [*Symmetry-adapted sample-based quantum diagonalization: Application to lattice model*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00914 "Symmetry-adapted sample-based quantum diagonalization: Application to lattice model")
Kosuke Nogaki, Steffen Backes, Tomonori Shirakawa, Seiji Yunoki, Ryotaro Arita
We present a symmetry-adapted extension of sample-based quantum diagonalization (SQD) that rigorously embeds space-group symmetry into the many-body subspace sampled by quantum hardware. The method is benchmarked on the two-leg ladder Hubbard model using both molecular orbital and momentum bases. Energy convergence is shown to be improved in the momentum basis compared to the molecular orbital basis for both the spin-quintet ground state and the spin-singlet excited state. We clarify the relationship between the compactness of the many-body wave function and the sparsity of the representation matrices of symmetry operations. Furthermore, the enhancement of the superconducting correlation function due to the Coulomb interaction is demonstrated. Our method highlights the importance of symmetry structure in random-sampling quantum simulation of correlated systems

[50]. [*Forces on alkali Rydberg atoms due to non-linearly polarized light*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01071 "Forces on alkali Rydberg atoms due to non-linearly polarized light")
A. Bhowmik, D. Blume
Trapped Rydberg atoms are highly promising candidates for quantum science experiments. While several approaches have been put forward to exert (trapping) forces on isolated Rydberg atoms, a widely applicable lossless technique is lacking. This paper proposes a robust versatile alternative technique that avoids lifetime compromising losses. Our proposal leverages the vector polarizability, which is induced by non-linearly polarized light and is shown to be several orders of magnitude larger than the usual scalar and tensor polarizabilities for commonly used alkali Rydberg series such as the $nS$, $nP$, and $nD$ series with principal quantum number $n$ as low as 30. The resulting force can be used to trap isolated Rydberg atoms over long times, which constitutes a key advance that is expected to impact quantum simulation applications, as well as to generate large light--Rydberg-atom hybrid states, which possess non-trivial position-dependent forces.

[51]. [*Efficiently driving F$_1$ molecular motor in experiment by suppressing nonequilibrium variation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01101 "Efficiently driving F$_1$ molecular motor in experiment by suppressing nonequilibrium variation")
Takahide Mishima, Deepak Gupta, Yohei Nakayama, W. Callum Wareham, Takumi Ohyama, David A. Sivak, Shoichi Toyabe
F$_1$-ATPase (F$_1$) is central to cellular energy transduction. Forcibly rotated by another motor F$_\mathrm{o}$, F$_1$ catalyzes ATP synthesis by converting mechanical work into chemical free energy stored in the molecule ATP. The details of how F$_\mathrm{o}$ drives F$_1$ are not fully understood; however, evaluating efficient ways to rotate F$_1$ could provide fruitful insights into this driving since there is a selective pressure to improve efficiency. Here, we show that rotating F$_1$ with an angle clamp is significantly more efficient than a constant torque. Our experiments, combined with theory and simulation, indicate that the angle clamp significantly suppresses the nonequilibrium variation that contributes to the futile dissipation of input work.

[52]. [*Tailoring Heat Transfer at Silica-Water Interfaces via Hydroxyl and Methyl Surface Groups*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01141 "Tailoring Heat Transfer at Silica-Water Interfaces via Hydroxyl and Methyl Surface Groups")
Viktor Mandrolko, Konstantinos Termentzidis, David Lacroix, Mykola Isaiev
Efficient thermal transport across solid-liquid interfaces is essential for optimizing heat dissipation in modern technological applications. This study employs molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the impact of surface functionalization on heat transfer at the silica/water interface. It has been shown that the surface functionalization changes significantly the wetting characteristics of silica surface: from one hand hydroxyl groups render such surfaces more hydrophilic, while methyl groups more hydrophobic. Here, we reveal that modifying the surface functionalization from methylated to hydroxylated groups results in: (i) up to an approximately eightfold increase in adhesion energy, (ii) a reorientation of interfacial water molecules to align perpendicular to the surface normal, (iii) a reduction in the liquid depletion length near the interface, and (iv) an overall enhancement of interfacial heat conduction. We quantify interfacial thermal resistance through the calculation of the contribution of each functional group to the total heat flux, providing insights into the physical mechanisms governing heat transfer at functionalized interfaces. We demonstrated that manipulation of the concentrations of the functional groups can be used to tailor interfacial thermal transport.

[53]. [*Uncovering complementary information sharing in spider monkey collective foraging using higher-order spatial networks*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01167 "Uncovering complementary information sharing in spider monkey collective foraging using higher-order spatial networks")
Gabriel Ramos-Fernandez, Ross S. Walker, Matthew J. Silk, Denis Boyer, Sandra E. Smith-Aguilar
Collectives are often able to process information in a distributed fashion, surpassing each individual member's processing capacity. In fission-fusion dynamics, where group members come together and split from others often, sharing complementary information about uniquely known foraging areas could allow a group to track a heterogenous foraging environment better than any group member on its own. We analyse the partial overlaps between individual core ranges, which we assume represent the knowledge of an individual during a given season. We identify sets of individuals whose overlap shows a balance between redundantly and uniquely known portions and we use simplicial complexes to represent these higher-order interactions. The structure of the simplicial complexes shows holes in various dimensions, revealing complementarity in the foraging information that is being shared. We propose that the complex spatial networks arising from fission-fusion dynamics allow for adaptive, collective processing of foraging information in dynamic environments.

[54]. [*Energy Transduction in Complex Networks with Multiple Resources: The Chemistry Paradigm*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01176 "Energy Transduction in Complex Networks with Multiple Resources: The Chemistry Paradigm")
Massimo Bilancioni, Massimiliano Esposito
We extend the traditional framework of steady state energy transduction -- typically characterized by a single input and output -- to multi-resource transduction in open chemical reaction networks (CRNs). Transduction occurs when stoichiometrically balanced processes are driven against their spontaneous directions by coupling them with thermodynamically favorable ones. However, when multiple processes (resources) interact through a shared CRN, identifying the relevant set of processes for analyzing transduction becomes a critical and complex challenge. To address this, we introduce a systematic procedure based on elementary processes, which cannot be further decomposed into subprocesses. Our theory generalizes the methodology used to define transduction efficiency in thermal engines operating between multiple heat baths. By selecting a reference equilibrium environment, it explicitly reveals the inherently relative nature of transduction efficiency and ties its definition to exergy. This framework also allows one to exclude unusable outputs from efficiency calculations. We further extend the concept of chemical gears to multi-process transduction, demonstrating their versatility as an analytical tool in complex settings. Finally, we apply our framework to central metabolic pathways, uncovering deep insights into their operation and highlighting the crucial difference between thermodynamic efficiencies and stoichiometric yields.

[55]. [*Inverse design of mirror-symmetric disordered systems for broadband perfect transmission*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01220 "Inverse design of mirror-symmetric disordered systems for broadband perfect transmission")
Zhazira Zhumabay, Cl\'ement Ferise, Vincent Pagneux, Stefan Rotter, Matthieu Davy
We present a framework for achieving broadband perfect wave transmission in complex systems by optimizing symmetric disordered media via inverse design. We show that leveraging symmetry of complex media reduces the optimization's complexity enabling the incorporation of additional constraints in the parameter space. Starting from a single perfectly transmitting state with predefined input and output wavefronts at a specific frequency, we progressively broaden the bandwidth - from a reflectionless exceptional point with a flattened lineshape to narrowband filters and ultimately to broadband quasi-perfect transmission exhibiting a rainbow effect. Numerical simulations based on the coupled dipole approximation are validated experimentally in a multichannel microwave waveguide with dielectric and metallic scatterers. Finally, we demonstrate broadband enhanced wave transmission through barriers highlighting the potential for advanced wave control applications.

[56]. [*Optical properties of a diamond NV color center from capped embedded multiconfigurational correlated wavefunction theory*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01250 "Optical properties of a diamond NV color center from capped embedded multiconfigurational correlated wavefunction theory")
John Mark P. Martirez
Diamond defects are among the most promising qubits. Modelling their properties through accurate quantum mechanical simulations can further their development into robust units of information. We use the recently developed capped density functional embedding theory (capped-DFET) with the multiconfigurational n-electron valence second-order perturbation theory to characterize the electronic excitation energies for different spin manifolds of the well-characterized negatively charged substitutional N defect adjacent to a vacancy (V$_C$) in diamond (N$_C$V$_C^-$). We successfully reproduce vertical excitation energies for both triplet and singlet states of N$_C$V$_C^-$ with errors < 0.1 eV. Unlike other embedding methods, capped-DFET exhibits robust predictions that are approximately independent of the embedded cluster size: it only requires a cluster to contain the defect atoms and their nearest neighbors (as small as a 40-atom capped cluster). Furthermore, our method is free from slowly converging Coulomb interactions between charged defects, and thus also only weakly dependent on supercell size.

[57]. [*Designing Band Gaps with Randomly Distributed Sub-Wavelength Helmholtz Resonators*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01347 "Designing Band Gaps with Randomly Distributed Sub-Wavelength Helmholtz Resonators")
Paulo S. Piva, Art L. Gower, I. David Abrahams
It is well-known that band gaps, in the frequency domain, can be achieved by using periodic metamaterials. However it has been challenging to design materials with broad band gaps or that have multiple overlapping band gaps. For periodic materials this difficulty arises because many different length scales would have to be repeated periodically within the same structure to have multiple overlapping band gaps. Here we present an alternative: to design band gaps with disordered materials. We show how to tailor band gaps by choosing any combination of Helmholtz resonators that are positioned randomly within a host acoustic medium. One key result is that we are able to reach simple formulae for the effective material properties, which work over a broad frequency range, and can therefore be used to rapidly design tailored metamaterials. We show that these formulae are robust by comparing them with high-fidelity Monte Carlo simulations over randomly positioned resonant scatterers.

[58]. [*Hacktive Matter: data-driven discovery through hackathon-based cross-disciplinary coding*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01365 "Hacktive Matter: data-driven discovery through hackathon-based cross-disciplinary coding")
Megan T. Valentine, Rae M. Robertson-Anderson
The past decade has seen unprecedented growth in active matter and autonomous biomaterials research, yielding diverse classes of materials that promise revolutionary applications such as self-healing infrastructure and self-sensing tissue implants. However, inconsistencies in metrics, definitions, and analysis algorithms across research groups, as well as the high-dimension data streams, has hindered identification of performance intersections. Progress in this arena demands multi-disciplinary team approaches to discovery with scaffolded training and cross-pollination of ideas, and requires new learning and collaboration methods. To address this challenge, we have developed a hackathon platform to train future scientists and engineers in big data, interdisciplinary collaboration, and community coding; and to design and beta-test high-throughput (HTP) biomaterials analysis software and workflows. We enforce a flat hierarchy, pairing participants ranging from high school students to faculty with varied experiences and skills to collectively contribute to data acquisition and processing, ideation, coding, testing and dissemination. With clearly-defined goals and deliverables, participants achieve success through a series of tutorials, small group coding sessions, facilitated breakouts, and large group report-outs and discussions. These modules facilitate efficient iterative algorithm development and optimization; strengthen community and collaboration skills; and establish teams, benchmarks, and community standards for continued productive work. Our hackathons provide a powerful model for the soft matter community to educate and train students and collaborators in cutting edge data-driven analysis, which is critical for future innovation in complex materials research.

[59]. [*SEAMM: A Simulation Environment for Atomistic and Molecular Modeling*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01400 "SEAMM: A Simulation Environment for Atomistic and Molecular Modeling")
Paul Saxe, Jessica Nash, Mohammad Mostafanejad, Eliseo Marin-Rimoldi, Hasnain Hafiz, Louis G Hector Jr., T. Daniel Crawford
The Simulation Environment for Atomistic and Molecular Modeling (SEAMM) is an open-source software package written in Python that provides a graphical interface for setting up, executing, and analyzing molecular and materials simulations. The graphical interface reduces the entry barrier for the use of new simulation tools, facilitating the interoperability of a wide range of simulation tools available to solve complex scientific and engineering problems in computational molecular science. Workflows are represented graphically by user-friendly flowcharts which are shareable and reproducible. When a flowchart is executed within the SEAMM environment, all results, as well as metadata describing the workflow and codes used, are saved in a datastore that can be viewed using a browser-based dashboard, which allows collaborators to view the results and use the flowcharts to extend the results. SEAMM is a powerful productivity and collaboration tool that enables interoperability between simulation codes and ensures reproducibility and transparency in scientific research.

[60]. [*QCMaquis 4.0: Multi-Purpose Electronic, Vibrational, and Vibronic Structure and Dynamics Calculations with the Density Matrix Renormalization Group*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01405 "QCMaquis 4.0: Multi-Purpose Electronic, Vibrational, and Vibronic Structure and Dynamics Calculations with the Density Matrix Renormalization Group")
Kalman Szenes, Nina Glaser, Mihael Erakovic, Valentin Barandun, Maximilian M\"orchen, Robin Feldmann, Stefano Battaglia, Alberto Baiardi, Markus Reiher
QCMaquis is a quantum chemistry software package for general molecular structure calculations in a matrix product state/matrix product operator formalism of the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG). It supports a wide range of features for electronic structure, multi-component (pre-Born-Oppenheimer), anharmonic vibrational structure, and vibronic calculations. In addition to the ground and excited state solvers, QCMaquis allows for time propagation of matrix product states based on the tangent-space formulation of time-dependent DMRG. The latest developments include transcorrelated electronic structure calculations, very recent vibrational and vibronic models, and a convenient Python wrapper, facilitating the interface with external libraries. This paper reviews all the new features of QCMaquis and demonstrates them with new results.

[61]. [*Searching for quantum non-thermodynamic phenomena*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05849 "Searching for quantum non-thermodynamic phenomena")
Yu Qiao
Recent research on the fundamentals of statistical mechanics has led to an interesting discovery [1-3]: With locally nonchaotic barriers, as Boltzmann's H-theorem is inapplicable, there exist nontrivial non-thermodynamic systems that can produce useful work by absorbing heat from a single thermal reservoir without any other effect, thereby breaking the boundaries of the second law of thermodynamics. The previous analyses used classical mechanical models. In the current investigation, the study is extended to quantum mechanics. First, we reiterate that the Fermi-Dirac distribution and the Bose-Einstein distribution are compatible with the generalized Maxwell's relations, which demonstrates the general robustness of the framework of quantum statistical mechanics. Next, we analyze a set of simple-step scattering problems. When the system is in contact with a thermal reservoir, a bound state inherently follows the second law of thermodynamics, while a scattering state may not. The root cause is associated with the nonlocal nature of the wave function. It implies that the non-thermodynamic phenomena favor unquantized energy and localized wave packets, exhibiting a tendency to occur in "semiclassical" setups.

[62]. [*Origin of the classical magnetization discontinuities of the dodecahedron*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17205 "Origin of the classical magnetization discontinuities of the dodecahedron")
N. P. Konstantinidis
The classical antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the dodecahedron has been shown to have three magnetization discontinuities in an external field. Here it is shown that the highest-field discontinuity can be directly traced back to the strong magnetization jump leading to saturation at the Ising limit, which originates from the magnetic response of an isolated pentagon and the frustrated connectivity of the dodecahedron. This discontinuity survives up to the $XY$ limit and disappears shortly before the ferromagnetic Ising interaction fully polarizes the spins. The two lower-field jumps of the model result from the competition of discontinuities that emerge from the magnetization plateau surviving away from the Ising limit.

[63]. [*Topology-induced symmetry breaking demonstrated in antiferromagnetic magnons on a M\"obius strip*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07846 "Topology-induced symmetry breaking demonstrated in antiferromagnetic magnons on a M\"obius strip")
Kuangyin Deng, Ran Cheng
We propose a mechanism of topology-induced symmetry breaking, where certain local symmetry preserved by the Hamiltonian is explicitly broken in the eigenmodes of excitation due to nontrivial real-space topology. We demonstrate this phenomenon by studying magnonic excitations on a M\"obius strip comprising of two antiferromagnetically coupled spin chains. Even with a simple Hamiltonian respecting local rotational symmetry and all local curvature effects ignored, magnons exhibit linear polarization of the N\'eel vector devoid of chirality, forming two non-degenerate branches that cannot be smoothly connected to or be globally decomposed by the circularly-polarized magnons. Correspondingly, one branch undergoes a spectral shift and only admits standing waves of half-integer wavelength, whereas the other only affords standing waves of integer wavelength. Under the M\"obius boundary condition, we further identify an exotic phase hosting spontaneous antiferromagnetic order whilst all exchange couplings are ferromagnetic. The suppression of chirality in the order parameter dynamics, hence the pattern of standing waves, can be generalized to other elementary excitations on non-orientable surfaces. Our findings showcase the profound influence of real-space topology on the physical nature of not just the ground state but also the quasiparticles.

[64]. [*From local spin nematicity to altermagnets: Footprints of band topology*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14620 "From local spin nematicity to altermagnets: Footprints of band topology")
Sanjib Kumar Das, Bitan Roy
Altermagnets are crystallographic rotational symmetry breaking spin-ordered states, possessing a net zero magnetization despite manifesting Kramer's non-degenerate bands. Here, we show that momentum-independent local spin nematic orders in monolayer, Bernal bilayer, and rhombohedral trilayer graphene give rise to $p$-wave, $d$-wave, and $f$-wave altermagnets, respectively, thereby inheriting the topology of linear, quadratic and cubic free fermion band dispersions that are also described in terms of angular momentum $\ell=1,\; 2$, and $3$ harmonics in the reciprocal space. The same conclusions also hold inside a spin-triplet nematic superconductor, featuring Majorana altermagnets. Altogether, these findings highlight the importance of electronic band structure in identifying such exotic magnetic orders in quantum materials. We depict the effects of in-plane magnetic fields on altermagnets, and propose spin-disordered alter-valley magnets in these systems.

[65]. [*Compressible quantum liquid with vanishing Drude weight*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14747 "Compressible quantum liquid with vanishing Drude weight")
Ahmed Abouelkomsan, Nisarga Paul, Ady Stern, Liang Fu
We explore the possibility of quantum liquids that are compressible but have vanishing DC conductivity in the absence of disorder. We show that the composite Fermi liquid emerging from strong interaction in a generic Chern band has zero Drude weight, in stark contrast to normal Fermi liquids. Our work establishes the absence of Drude weight as the defining property of the composite Fermi liquid phase, which distinguishes it from the Fermi liquid or other types of non-Fermi liquids. Our findings point to a possibly wide class of gapless quantum phases with unexpected transport and optical properties.

[66]. [*Non-Abelian spin Hall insulator*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14617 "Non-Abelian spin Hall insulator")
Ahmed Abouelkomsan, Liang Fu
Motivated by a recent experiment reporting the fractional quantum spin Hall effect in twisted ${\rm MoTe}_2$, we investigate microscopically the prospects of realizing exotic topologically ordered states beyond conventional quantum Hall physics. We show that a non-Abelian spin Hall insulator, a state of two copies of the non-Abelian Moore-Read state, can be stabilized at half filling of time-reversal conjugate Chern bands. We elucidate that the existence of this phase relies on the reduction of opposite-spin interactions at short distances to overcome the Ising ferromagnetism. Moreover, we demonstrate that band mixing provides a generic mechanism for this reduction to be achieved. Quite remarkably, we find that a renormalization of opposite-spin interactions at short distances as small as 15 % of the moir\'e period is sufficient for a direct transition to a completely spin unpolarized phase which supports the non-Abelian spin Hall insulator. Furthermore, we show that the non-Abelian spin Hall insulator can either break time-reversal symmetry or preserve it depending on the underlying topological order.

[67]. [*Early-stage impact dynamics in dense suspensions of millimeter-sized particles*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.19202 "Early-stage impact dynamics in dense suspensions of millimeter-sized particles")
Hirokazu Maruoka, Hisao Hayakawa
This study investigates the phenomenon of the early-stage dynamics of impact-induced hardening in dense suspensions, where materials undergo solidification upon impact. While Stokes flow theory traditionally applies to suspensions with micrometer-sized particles due to their low Reynolds numbers, suspensions containing larger particles defy such idealizations. Our work focuses on the early-stage impact-induced hardening of suspensions containing millimeter-sized particles through dynamic impact experiments. We are particularly interested in the maximum drag force $F_\mathrm{max}$ acting on the projectile as a function of the impact speed $u_0$. We successfully conducted experiments using these suspensions and confirmed the relation $F_\mathrm{max}\sim u_0^{3/2}$ for relatively large $u_0$ as observed in the previous studies suspensions of micrometer-sized particles. Our findings reveal that the early-stage behaviors of millimeter-sized particle suspensions align well with predictions from the floating model, typically applicable under Stokes flow conditions. This research sheds light on the complex dynamics of impact-induced hardening in dense suspensions, particularly with larger particles, advancing our understanding beyond conventional micrometer-sized systems.

[68]. [*Statistical Mechanical Analysis of Gaussian Processes*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13772 "Statistical Mechanical Analysis of Gaussian Processes")
Jun Tsuzurugi
In this paper, we analyze Gaussian processes using statistical mechanics. Although the input is originally multidimensional, we simplify our model by considering the input as one-dimensional for statistical mechanical analysis. Furthermore, we employ periodic boundary conditions as an additional modeling approach. By using periodic boundary conditions, we can diagonalize the covariance matrix. The diagonalized covariance matrix is then applied to Gaussian processes. This allows for a statistical mechanical analysis of Gaussian processes using the derived diagonalized matrix. We indicate that the analytical solutions obtained in this method closely match the results from simulations.

[69]. [*Truncated Gaussian basis approach for simulating many-body dynamics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04204 "Truncated Gaussian basis approach for simulating many-body dynamics")
Nico Albert, Yueshui Zhang, Hong-Hao Tu
We propose a Truncated Gaussian Basis Approach (TGBA) for simulating the dynamics of quantum many-body systems. The approach constructs an effective Hamiltonian within a reduced subspace, spanned by fermionic Gaussian states, and diagonalizes it to obtain approximate eigenstates and eigenenergies. Symmetries can be exploited to perform parallel computation, enabling to simulate systems with much larger sizes. As an example, we compute the dynamic structure factor and study quench dynamics in a non-integrable quantum Ising chain, known as ``$E_8$ magnet''. The mass ratios calculated through the dynamic structure factor show excellent agreement with Zamolodchikov's analytical predictions. For quench dynamics we observe that time-evolving wave functions in the truncated subspace facilitates the simulation of long-time dynamics.

[70]. [*Reply to "Comment on "Reconsidering the nonlinear emergent inductance: time-varying Joule heating and its impact on the AC electrical response"" by Yokouch et al*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04325 "Reply to "Comment on "Reconsidering the nonlinear emergent inductance: time-varying Joule heating and its impact on the AC electrical response"" by Yokouch et al")
Soju Furuta, Wataru Koshibae, Taka-hisa Arima, Fumitaka Kagawa
This is a response to the comments [arXiv:2407.15682 and Phys.Rev.B 111, 146401 (2025)] by Yokouchi et al. on our paper in Phys.Rev.B 110, 174402 (2024). In this Reply, we note that (i) their arguments lack a discussion of whether the overall characteristics of the observed nonlinear impedance, including its magnitude and unphysical negative inductance interpretation, can be explained by the emergent induction scenario, whereas the Joule heating model can, (ii) they incorrectly refer to the Joule heating model, and (iii) their new data in the Comment are also quantitatively explained by the Joule heating model. These findings suggest that, contrary to the opinion by Yokouchi et al., the overall behavior of the observed impedance is irrelevant to emergent induction.

[71]. [*Transport of magnetically sensitive atoms in a magnetic environment*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06640 "Transport of magnetically sensitive atoms in a magnetic environment")
Davlet Kumpilov, Ivan Pyrkh, Ivan Cojocaru, Polina Trofimova, Arjuna Rudnev, Vladimir Khlebnikov, Pavel Aksentsev, Ayrat Ibrahimov, Alexander Yeremeyev, Kirill Frolov, Sergey Kuzmin, Anna Zykova, Daniil Pershin, Vladislav Tsyganok, Alexey Akimov
Among interesting applications of cold atoms, quantum simulations attract a lot of attention. In this context, rare-earth ultracold atoms are particularly appealing for such simulators due to their numerous Fano-Feshbach resonances and magnetic dipole moments in the ground state. Creating a quantum gas microscope requires a large optical access that may be achieved using transport of atoms between separate vacuum volumes. We demonstrate that in case of the transport of magnetic atoms the magnetic field can be directly measured and adjusted to reduce additional losses after the transport therefore increasing the efficiency of subsequent evaporation cooling. This approach allows to transfer over 85% of the atoms from the main chamber to the scientific chamber, located 38 cm away with moderate laser power of 26 W without atomic polarization decay.

[72]. [*Superfluidity of quasi-2D He-4 droplets on graphite*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.18911 "Superfluidity of quasi-2D He-4 droplets on graphite")
K. M. Kolevski, M. Boninsegni
The superfluid response of nanoscale size quasi-2D He-4 droplets adsorbed on a graphite substrate is investigated by computer simulations. It is found that clusters comprising as few as 7 atoms are stable at temperatures lower than < 0.15 K. Clusters of ~20 atoms or less are liquid-like and ~100% superfluid. As the size is increased, the central region crystallizes, forming the commensurate C_1/3 phase, with a surface sliver of superfluidity evolving into a perimetral 1D Luttinger liquid with increasing cluster size. The relevance to quasi-2D molecular spectroscopy and to transverse quantum superfluidity is discussed.

[73]. [*Layered Multiple Scattering Approach to Hard X-ray Photoelectron Diffraction: Theory and Application*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09669 "Layered Multiple Scattering Approach to Hard X-ray Photoelectron Diffraction: Theory and Application")
Trung-Phuc Vo, Olena Tkach, Sylvain Tricot, Didier Sebilleau, Jurgen Braun, Aki Pulkkinen, Aimo Winkelmann, Olena Fedchenko, Yaryna Lytvynenko, Dmitry Vasilyev, Hans-Joachim Elmers, Gerd Schonhense, Jan Minar
Photoelectron diffraction (PED) is a powerful and essential experimental technique for resolving the structure of surfaces with sub-angstrom resolution. In the high energy regime, researchers in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) observe modulating patterns attributed to X-ray-PED (XPD) effects. This is accompanied by other challenges such as low cross-sections, significant photon momentum transfer, and non-negligible phonon scattering. Overall, XPD is not only an advantageous approach but also exhibits unexpected effects. To disentangle these diffraction influences, we present a PED implementation for the SPRKKR package that utilizes multiple scattering theory and a one-step model in the photoemission process. Unlike real-space implementations of the multiple scattering XPD formalism, we propose a k-space implementation based on the layer KKR method. The main advantage of this method is its ability to address a very broad kinetic energy range (20-8000 eV) without convergence problems related to angular momentum and cluster size. Furthermore, the so-called alloy analogy model can be used to simulate XPD at finite temperatures as well as XPD effects observed in soft and hard X-ray ARPES. For practical applications, we have calculated the circular dichroism in angular distributions (CDAD) associated with core-level photoemission of 2p from Si(100) and 3p from Ge(100). Photoelectrons are excited by hard X-rays (6000 eV) with right and left circularly polarized radiation (RCP and LCP, respectively).

[74]. [*Cartesian atomic moment machine learning interatomic potentials*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12096 "Cartesian atomic moment machine learning interatomic potentials")
Mingjian Wen, Wei-Fan Huang, Jin Dai, Santosh Adhikari
Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) have substantially advanced atomistic simulations in materials science and chemistry by balancing accuracy and computational efficiency. While leading MLIPs rely on representing atomic environments using spherical tensors, Cartesian representations offer potential advantages in simplicity and efficiency. Here, we introduce the Cartesian Atomic Moment Potential (CAMP), an approach to building MLIPs entirely in Cartesian space. CAMP constructs atomic moment tensors from neighboring atoms and employs tensor products to incorporate higher body-order interactions, providing a complete description of local atomic environments. Integrated into a graph neural network (GNN) framework, CAMP enables physically motivated, systematically improvable potentials. The model demonstrates excellent performance across diverse systems, including periodic structures, small organic molecules, and two-dimensional materials, achieving accuracy, efficiency, and stability in molecular dynamics simulations that rival or surpass current leading models. CAMP provides a powerful tool for atomistic simulations to accelerate materials understanding and discovery.

[75]. [*Model-Based Iterative Reconstruction of Three-Dimensional Magnetisation in a Nanowire Structure Using Electron Holographic Vector Field Tomography*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15323 "Model-Based Iterative Reconstruction of Three-Dimensional Magnetisation in a Nanowire Structure Using Electron Holographic Vector Field Tomography")
Aurys Silinga, Andr\'as Kov\'acs, Stephen McVitie, Rafal E. Dunin-Borkowski, Kayla Fallon, Trevor P. Almeida
Methods for characterisation of 3D magnetic spin structures are necessary to advance the performance of 3D magnetic nanoscale technologies. However, as the component dimensions approach the nanometre range, it becomes more challenging to analyse 3D magnetic configurations with the appropriate spatial resolution. In this paper, we present a method based on Lorentz transmission electron microscopy in which model-based iterative reconstruction (MBIR) is used to reconstruct the most probable magnetisation in an exemplar nanostructure. This method is based on relating electron phase measurements to the magnetic configuration of the nanostructure, and therefore, the method is subject to certain limitations. In this proof-of-concept experiment, MBIR was tested on an L-shaped ferromagnetic cobalt nanowire, fabricated using focused electron beam induced deposition. Off-axis electron holography was used to acquire a tomographic tilt series of electron holograms, which were analysed to measure magnetic electron phase shift over two tilt arcs with up to $ \pm 60$ degree tilt range. Then, a 3D magnetisation vector field consistent with the tomographic phase measurements was reconstructed, revealing multiple magnetic domains within the nanowire. The reconstructed magnetisation is accurate for magnetic domains larger than 50 nm, and higher resolution can be achieved by the continued development of tomographic reconstruction algorithms.

[76]. [*Active phase separation: new phenomenology from non-equilibrium physics*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.02854 "Active phase separation: new phenomenology from non-equilibrium physics")
M. E. Cates, C. Nardini
In active systems, whose constituents have non-equilibrium dynamics at local level, fluid-fluid phase separation is widely observed. Examples include the formation of membraneless organelles within cells; the clustering of self-propelled colloidal particles in the absence of attractive forces, and some types of ecological segregation. A schematic understanding of such active phase separation was initially borrowed from what is known for the equilibrium case, in which detailed balance holds at microscopic level. However it has recently become clear that in active systems the absence of detailed balance, although it leave phase separation qualitatively unchanged in some regimes (for example domain growth driven by interfacial tension via Ostwald ripening), can in other regimes radically alter its phenomenology at mechanistic level. For example, microphase separation can be caused by reverse Ostwald ripening, a process that is hard to imagine from an equilibrium perspective. This and other new phenomena arise because, instead of having a single, positive interfacial tension like their equilibrium counterparts, the fluid-fluid interfaces created by active phase separation can have several distinct interfacial tensions governing different properties, some of which can be negative. These phenomena can be broadly understood by studying continuum field theories for a single conserved scalar order parameter (the fluid density), supplemented with a velocity field in cases where momentum conservation is also present. More complex regimes arise in systems described by multiple scalar order parameters (especially with nonreciprocal interactions between these); or when an order parameter undergoes both conserved and non-conserved dynamics; or in systems that support orientational long-range order in one or more of the coexisting phases. In this Review [...]

[77]. [*Stability of chiral magnon condensates in collinear antiferromagnetic insulators*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14652 "Stability of chiral magnon condensates in collinear antiferromagnetic insulators")
Therese Frostad, Anne Louise Kristoffersen, Verena Brehm, Roberto E. Troncoso, Arne Brataas, Alireza Qaiumzadeh
Quasiequilibrium magnon Bose-Einstein condensates in ferromagnetic insulators have been a field of great interest, while condensation in antiferromagnetic systems has not yet been explored in detail. We analyze the stability of condensed chiral magnons in two antiferromagnetic insulators: a uniaxial easy-axis system and a biaxial system. We show that two-component magnon condensation and inter-magnon interactions are essential to create metastable magnon condensation. The uniaxial system with a Rashba-type Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction supports two degenerate condensate populations at finite wave vectors. We find that the condensation state in this model is (meta)stable only when the distribution of condensed magnons between the two populations is symmetric. In addition, we demonstrate the emergence of a zero-sound-like Goldstone mode in antiferromagnetic systems that support two-component magnon condensation. On the other hand, in the biaxial system without Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, we predict that the magnon condensate cannot stabilize due to the breaking of the magnon degeneracy. Our results suggest that this instability is a general characteristic of single-component quasiequilibrium quasiparticle condensates.

[78]. [*Self-generated electrokinetic flows from active-charged boundary patterns*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15397 "Self-generated electrokinetic flows from active-charged boundary patterns")
Ahis Shrestha, Eleftherios Kirkinis, Monica Olvera de la Cruz
We develop a hydrodynamic description of self-generated electrolyte flow in capillaries whose bounding walls feature both non-uniform distributions of charge and non-uniform active ionic fluxes. The hydrodynamic velocity arising in such a system has components that are forbidden by symmetry in the absence of charge and fluxes. However, when these two boundary mechanisms are simultaneously present, they can lead to a symmetry broken state where steady flows with both unidirectional and circulatory components emerge. We show that these flow states arise when modulated boundary patterns of charge and fluxes are offset by a flux-charge phase difference, which is associated with the separation between sites of their peak densities on the wall. Mismatch in diffusivity of cationic and anionic species can modify the flow states and becomes an enhancing factor when fluxes of both ion species are being produced together at the same site. We demonstrate that this mechanism can be realized with a microfluidic generator which is powered by enzyme-coated patches that catalyzes reactants in the solution to produce fluxes of ions. The local ionic elevation or depletion that disrupts a non-uniform double layer, promotes self-induced gradients yielding persistent body forces to generate bulk fluid motion. Our work quantifies a boundary-driven mechanism behind self-sustained electrolyte flow in confined environments that exists without any external bulk-imposed fields or gradients. It provides a theoretical framework for understanding the combined effect of active and charged boundaries that are relevant in biological or soft matter systems, and can be utilized in electrofluidic and iontronic applications.

[79]. [*Decoding active force fluctuations from spatial trajectories of active systems*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02236 "Decoding active force fluctuations from spatial trajectories of active systems")
Anisha Majhi, Biswajit Das, Subhadeep Gupta, Anand Dev Ranjan, Amirul Islam Mallick, Shuvojit Paul, Ayan Banerjee
Mesoscopic active systems exhibit various unique behaviours - absent in passive systems - due to the forces generated by the corresponding constituents by converting their available free energies. However, estimating these forces - which are also stochastic and remain intertwined with the thermal noise - is especially non-trivial. Here, we introduce a technique to extract such fluctuating active forces acting on a passive particle immersed in an active bath with high statistical accuracy by filtering out the related thermal noise. We first test the efficacy of our method under numerical scenarios with different types of activity, and then apply it to the experimental trajectories of a microscopic particle (optically) trapped inside an active bath consisting of motile \textit{E.Coli.} bacteria. We believe that our simple yet powerful approach, which appears agnostic to the nature of the active force, should enable accurate measurement of force dynamics in living matter and potentially allow direct but reliable estimation of key thermodynamic parameters such as heat, work, and entropy production.

[80]. [*Dynamically stable two- and four-droplet solitons in a very strongly dipolar NaCs condensate*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09903 "Dynamically stable two- and four-droplet solitons in a very strongly dipolar NaCs condensate")
S K Adhikari
A strongly dipolar Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of Dy atoms could sustain different types of states not possible in a non-dipolar BEC. Motivated by the observation of a very strongly dipolar condensate of NaCs molecules [N. Bigagli et al., Nature 631, 289 (2024)], with dipolar interaction stronger by more than an order of magnitude compared to that of Dy atoms, we demonstrate that in a very strongly dipolar NaCs BEC, it is possible to have a two- and a four-droplet metastable soliton, axially free along the polarization $z$ direction. In this study we employ imaginary-time propagation of an improved mean-field model, including the Lee-Huang-Yang interaction. The dipolar solitons are subject to an expulsive Gaussian potential at the center and a harmonic potential $-$ both acting in the $x$-$y$ plane. The phase-coherent solitons, possessing the isolated droplets, are free to move along the $z$ axis without any relative motion between the droplets. The dynamical stability and mobility of these solitons are demonstrated by real-time propagation employing the converged imaginary-time wave function as the initial state.

[81]. [*Engineering Magnetotransport Through Hierarchical Symmetry in Weyl Semimetal Superlattices*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16512 "Engineering Magnetotransport Through Hierarchical Symmetry in Weyl Semimetal Superlattices")
Nathan C. Drucker, Federico Balduini, Jules Schadt, Lorenzo Rocchino, Tathagata Paul, Vicky Hasse, Claudia Felser, Heinz Schmid, Cezar B. Zota, Bernd Gotsmann
Superlattice engineering is a powerful way to tune the transport properties of a material. In this work we show that magnetotransport can be modified by superlattices in 3D materials based on the relative symmetry between the Fermi-surface and superlattice. We demonstrate commensuration oscillations in the ballistic transport regime of a nanostructured 3D material with the Weyl semimetal NbP, a signature typically limited to superlattices in 2D materials. The behavior of the oscillations encodes information about the shared properties between the quasiparticles at the Fermi-surface--including their momentum, charge, mass, and rotational symmetry--and the structure of the superlattice. The magnetic field and temperature dependence of the commensuration oscillations enables us to extract the Fermi-momenta and quasiparticle mass at an order of magnitude lower magnetic field and higher temperature than Shubnikov-de Haas quantum oscillations. Furthermore, we use a chiral superlattice to engineer asymmetric longitudinal magnetoresistance based on the charge of the quasiparticles and superlattice enantiomer. These results demonstrate nanopatterned superlattices as an effective method for fermiology, and also point towards new ways of engineering quantum transport in these systems based on the mutual properties of the superlattice and Fermi-surface.

[82]. [*MPd5 kagome superconductors studied by density functional calculations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15445 "MPd5 kagome superconductors studied by density functional calculations")
Dan Li, Zhengxuan Wang, Panshi Jing, Mehrdad Shiri, Kun Wang, Chunlan Ma, Shijing Gong, Chuanxi Zhao, Tianxing Wang, Xiao Dong, Lin Zhuang, Wuming Liu, Yipeng An
Kagome materials, which are composed of hexagons tiled with a shared triangle, have inspired enormous interest due to their unique structures and rich physical properties; exploring superconducting material systems with new kagome structures is still an important research direction. Here, we predict a type of kagome superconductor, MPd5 (M is a group-IIA metal element), and identify that it exhibits coexistence of superconductivity and nontrivial topological properties. We uncover its phonon-mediated superconductivity by the density functional theory for superconductors, predicting the superconducting transition temperatures (Tc) of 2.64, 2.03, and 1.50 K for CaPd5, SrPd5, and BaPd5, respectively. These Tc can be effectively tuned through the application of external pressure and electron doping. The present results also demonstrate that MPd5 have topological properties; e.g., CaPd5 shows topological nontrivial intersection near the Fermi level (EF). Our results indicate that MPd5 materials can be an emerging material platform with rich exotic physics in their kagome structures, and render themselves excellent candidates for superconducting and advanced functional materials that could be utilized in topological quantum computing and information technology.

[83]. [*Topological phase transitions in superconductors with chiral symmetry*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19882 "Topological phase transitions in superconductors with chiral symmetry")
Kristian L{\o}v{\aa}s Svalland, Maria Teresa Mercaldo, Mario Cuoco
We study topological transitions in one dimensional superconductors that can harbor multiple edge Majorana bound states protected by chiral symmetry. The chiral symmetry arises due to the structure of the internal spin degrees of freedom of the superconductor and it can be guided by the coupling of the superconductor with sources of time-reversal symmetry breaking. We then consider distinct regions of the phase diagram in the parameters space that are marked by gapless excitations in the spectrum and evaluate the conditions for inducing a topological transition. We show that for gapless chiral symmetric superconductors one can identify a class of physical perturbations that enable a gap opening in the spectrum, without breaking chirality, and turn the system into a topological state. This type of superconductor is dubbed marginal topological superconductor because an infinitesimally small perturbation is able to induce a transition into a topological nontrivial phase. To explicitly demonstrate and evaluate the character of the transitions from gapless to topological gapfull phases we explore different physical cases including p-wave superconductor in the presence of an applied magnetic field or proximity-coupled to a ferromagnet, and s-wave superconductor in a noncollinear magnetic ordering.

[84]. [*Beware of the water: Hidden hydrogenation of perovskite membranes made by the water-soluble sacrificial layer method*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04197 "Beware of the water: Hidden hydrogenation of perovskite membranes made by the water-soluble sacrificial layer method")
Umair Saeed, Felip Sandiumenge, Kumara Cordero-Edwards, Jessica Padilla-Pantoja, Jos\'e Manuel Caicedo Roque, David Pesquera, Jos\'e Santiso, Gustau Catalan
The fabrication of perovskite oxide free-standing films (membranes) by lift-off methods using water-soluble sacrificial layers is appealing because of the new mechanical degrees of freedom that these membranes present over conventional epitaxial films. However, little is known about how their fabrication process, and in particular the exposure to water during the etching step, affects their properties. Here, we investigate how membranes of two perovskite archetypes, antiferroelectric PbZrO3 and paraelectric SrTiO3, are affected by water-based etching step. Using Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction, we find evidence that hydrogen penetrates the perovskite structure. Concomitant with this protonation, the functional properties also change, and both materials display ferroelectric-like behavior that is absent in bulk ceramics or hydrogen-free films at room temperature. We also find that thermal annealing can be used to expel the hydrogen from the membranes, which henceforth recover bulk-like properties. The two main conclusions of this work are that (i) any perovskite membrane made by sacrificial layer hydrolysis is vulnerable to hydrogen penetration (protonation) that can induce important but extrinsic changes in functional properties, and (ii) the hydrogen can, and should, be expelled by annealing to recover intrinsic behaviour.

[85]. [*Current-Enabled Optical Conductivity of Collective Modes in Unconventional Superconductors*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06642 "Current-Enabled Optical Conductivity of Collective Modes in Unconventional Superconductors")
Gerrit Niederhoff, Ryusei Kataoka, Kazuaki Takasan, Naoto Tsuji
We theoretically investigate the current-enabled linear optical conductivity of collective modes in superconductors with unconventional pairing symmetries. After deriving general formulas for the optical conductivity of a superconductor featuring multiple pairing channels and bands using the path integral formalism, we apply these formulas to several models. Using a model of competing s- and d-wave pairing interactions, we find that several known collective modes generate peaks in the optical conductivity upon injection of a supercurrent. This includes single- and multiband versions of Bardasis-Schrieffer modes, mixed-symmetry Bardasis-Schrieffer modes, and Leggett modes. Using a model for interband p-wave superconductivity with Rashba spin-orbit coupling, we find that in such a system Bardasis-Schrieffer modes are optically active even without introducing a supercurrent. In a p+ip chiral ground state, these modes turn out to produce peaks in the longitudinal and transverse optical conductivity. Other collective modes belonging to the chiral p+ip order parameter turn out to be unaffected by the spin-orbit coupling but contribute to the optical response when a supercurrent is introduced. These results promise new avenues for the observation of collective modes in a variety of superconducting systems, including multiband superconductors and superconductors that feature multiple pairing channels or multi-component order parameters, such as chiral p- or d-wave superconductors.

[86]. [*Max-Cut graph-driven quantum circuit design for planar spin glasses*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12096 "Max-Cut graph-driven quantum circuit design for planar spin glasses")
Seyed Ehsan Ghasempouri, Gerhard W. Dueck, Stijn De Baerdemacker
Finding the ground state of spin glasses is a challenging problem with broad implications. Many hard optimization problems, including NP-complete problems, can be mapped, for instance, to the Ising spin glass model. We present a graph-based approach that allows for accurate state initialization of a frustrated triangular spin-lattice with up to 20 sites that stays away from barren plateaus. To optimize circuit efficiency and trainability, we employ a clustering strategy that organizes qubits into distinct groups based on the maximum cut technique, which divides the lattice into two subsets maximally disconnected. We provide evidence that this Max-Cut-based lattice division offers a robust framework for optimizing circuit design and effectively modeling frustrated systems at polynomial cost. All simulations are performed within the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) formalism, the current paradigm for noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ), but can be extended beyond. Our results underscore the potential of hybrid quantum-classical methods in addressing complex optimization problems.

[87]. [*Unveiling Fine Structure and Energy-driven Transition of Photoelectron Kikuchi Diffraction*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14758 "Unveiling Fine Structure and Energy-driven Transition of Photoelectron Kikuchi Diffraction")
Trung-Phuc Vo, Olena Tkach, Aki Pulkkinen, Didier Sebilleau, Aimo Winkelmann, Olena Fedchenko, Yaryna Lytvynenko, Dmitry Vasilyev, Hans-Joachim Elmers, Gerd Schonhense, Jan Minar
The intricate fine structure of Kikuchi diffraction plays a vital role in probing phase transformations and strain distributions in functional materials, particularly in electron microscopy. Beyond these applications, it also proves essential in photoemission spectroscopy (PES) at high photon energies, aiding in the disentanglement of complex angle-resolved PES data and enabling emitter-site-specific studies. However, the detection and analysis of these rich faint structures in photoelectron diffraction (PED), especially in the hard X-ray regime, remain highly challenging, with only a limited number of simulations successfully reproducing these patterns. The strong energy dependence of Kikuchi patterns further complicates their interpretation, necessitating advanced theoretical approaches. To enhance structural analysis, we present a comprehensive theoretical study of fine diffraction patterns and their evolution with energy by simulating core-level emissions from Ge(100) and Si(100). Using multiple-scattering theory and the fully relativistic one-step photoemission model, we simulate faint pattern networks for various core levels across different kinetic energies (106 eV - 4174 eV), avoiding cluster size convergence issues inherent in cluster-based methods. Broadening in patterns is discussed via the inelastic scattering treatment. For the first time, circular dichroism has been observed and successfully reproduced in the angular distribution of Si (100) 1s, revealing detailed features and asymmetries up to 31%. Notably, we successfully replicate experimental bulk and more "surface-sensitivity" diffraction features, further validating the robustness of our simulations. The results show remarkable agreement with the experimental data obtained using circularly polarized radiations, demonstrating the potential of this methodology for advancing high-energy PES investigations.

[88]. [*Exciton Basis Description of Ultrafast Triplet Separation in Pentacene-(Tetracene)2-Pentacene Intramolecular Singlet Fission Chromophore*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16519 "Exciton Basis Description of Ultrafast Triplet Separation in Pentacene-(Tetracene)2-Pentacene Intramolecular Singlet Fission Chromophore")
Arifa Nazir, Alok Shukla, Sumit Mazumdar
Precise understanding of the electronic structures of optically dark triplet-triplet multiexcitons that are the intermediate states in singlet fission (SF) continues to be a challenge. This is particularly true for intramolecular singlet fission (iSF) chromophores, that are oligomers of large monomer molecules. We have performed quantum many-body calculations of the complete set of excited states relevant to iSF in Pentacene-(Tetracene)2-Pentacene oligomers, consisting of two terminal pentacene monomers linked by two tetracene monomers. Our computations use an exciton basis that gives physical pictorial descriptions of all eigenstates, and are performed over an active space of twenty-eight monomer molecular orbitals, including configuration interaction with all relevant quadruple excitations within the active space, thereby ensuring very high precision. We discuss the many-electron structures of the optical predominantly intramonomer spin-singlets, intermonomer charge-transfer excitations, and most importantly, the complete set of low energy covalent triplet-triplet multiexcitons. We are able to explain the weak binding energy of the pentacene-tetracene triplet-triplet eigenstate that is generated following photoexcitation. We explain the increase in lifetime with increasing numbers of tetracene monomers of the transient absorption associated with contiguous pentacene-tetracene triplet-triplet in this family of oligomers. We are consequently able to give a pictorial description of the triplet separation following generation of the initial triplet-triplet, leading to a state with individual triplets occupying only the two pentacene monomers. We expect many applications of our theoretical approach to triplet separation.

[89]. [*Acoustic phonons, spin-phonon coupling and spin relaxation via the lattice reorientation mechanism in hexagonal germanium nanowires*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.18198 "Acoustic phonons, spin-phonon coupling and spin relaxation via the lattice reorientation mechanism in hexagonal germanium nanowires")
Baksa Kolok, Gy\"orgy Frank, Andr\'as P\'alyi
Spin relaxation via electron-phonon interaction is an important decoherence mechanism for spin qubits. In this work, we study spin relaxation in hexagonal (2H) germanium, a novel direct-gap semiconductor showing great potential to combine highly coherent spin qubits with optical functionality. Focusing on electrostatically defined quantum dots in hexagonal germanium nanowires, we (i) identify geometries where spin qubit experiments are feasible, (ii) compute the nanowire phonon modes, and (iii) describe spin relaxation of hole spin qubits due to phonon-induced lattice reorientation, a direct spin-phonon coupling mechanism that is absent in cubic semiconductors typically used for spin qubits (GaAs, cubic Si, cubic Ge). We obtain the spin relaxation time as a function of nanowire cross section, quantum dot confinement length, and magnetic field. For realistic parameters, we find relaxation times above 10 ms, and reveal that the magnetic field direction maximizing the relaxation time depends on the qubit Larmor frequency. Our results facilitate the design of nanowire quantum dot experiments with long qubit relaxation times.

[90]. [*A rigorous data-driven approach to the nucleation of defects in metals exploiting the link between kinetic properties and (dis)order parameters*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20211 "A rigorous data-driven approach to the nucleation of defects in metals exploiting the link between kinetic properties and (dis)order parameters")
Mattia Perrone, David D. Girardier, Giovanni M. Pavan, Fabio Pietrucci
Nucleation processes, through which a new structure progressively forms within a pre-existing homogeneous phase, are fundamental in materials science, but are also typically non-trivial to elucidate. Cases in which to nucleate are defects (or disorder) in an initially ordered structure make no exception. A prominent example is the nucleation of dislocations in metals, which critically govern their mechanical, electronic, thermal, and chemical properties. While atomic-level insights can be attained using, \textit{e.g.}, molecular dynamics simulations, systematically characterizing nucleation mechanisms and accurately quantifying kinetic rates remain challenging tasks. In this work, we demonstrate how the choice of the order parameter used to track the transition has a very strong effect on the accuracy of the kinetic rate predicted from the corresponding free-energy barrier and diffusion coefficient, a fact that has been often overlooked in the past. By exploiting this systematic error to our advantage, we demonstrate that it is possible to rigorously characterize the nucleation process using a data-driven scheme based on a variational principle, leading to optimal order parameters and a faithful mechanistic description. We apply this method to characterize, as a representative case study, the nucleation of dislocations in crystalline $fcc$ copper by analyzing replica molecular dynamics simulations at the elastic-plastic limit. By means of committor analysis and Langevin modeling, our approach allows to systematically rank candidate (dis)order parameters, identify the critical nuclei (transition states), and infer the free-energy landscapes. Given its general foundations, this method can be extended to nucleation phenomena in a broad class of materials.

[91]. [*Towards Space Group Determination from EBSD Patterns: The Role of Deep Learning and High-throughput Dynamical Simulations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21331 "Towards Space Group Determination from EBSD Patterns: The Role of Deep Learning and High-throughput Dynamical Simulations")
Alfred Yan, Muhammad Nur Talha Kilic, Gert Nolze, Ankit Agrawal, Alok Choudhary, Roberto dos Reis, Vinayak Dravid
The design of novel materials hinges on the understanding of structure-property relationships. However, in recent times, our capability to synthesize a large number of materials has outpaced our speed at characterizing them. While the overall chemical constituents can be readily known during synthesis, the structural evolution and characterization of newly synthesized samples remains a bottleneck for the ultimate goal of high throughput nanomaterials discovery. Thus, scalable methods for crystal symmetry determination that can analyze a large volume of material samples within a short time-frame are especially needed. Kikuchi diffraction in the SEM is a promising technique for this due to its sensitivity to dynamical scattering, which may provide information beyond just the seven crystal systems and fourteen Bravais lattices. After diffraction patterns are collected from material samples, deep learning methods may be able to classify the space group symmetries using the patterns as input, which paired with the elemental composition, would help enable the determination of the crystal structure. To investigate the feasibility of this solution, neural networks were trained to predict the space group type of background corrected EBSD patterns. Our networks were first trained and tested on an artificial dataset of EBSD patterns of 5,148 different cubic phases, created through physics-based dynamical simulations. Next, Maximum Classifier Discrepancy, an unsupervised deep learning-based domain adaptation method, was utilized to train neural networks to make predictions for experimental EBSD patterns. We introduce a relabeling scheme, which enables our models to achieve accuracy scores higher than 90% on simulated and experimental data, suggesting that neural networks are capable of making predictions of crystal symmetry from an EBSD pattern.

[92]. [*Characterizing the embedded states of a fluorescent probe within a lipid bilayer using molecular dynamics simulations*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00403 "Characterizing the embedded states of a fluorescent probe within a lipid bilayer using molecular dynamics simulations")
Ryo Okabe, Natsuumi Ito, Yuya Matsubara, Nozomi Morishita Watanabe, Hiroshi Umakoshi, Kento Kasahara, Nobuyuki Matubayasi
The physicochemical properties of lipid bilayers (membranes) are closely associated with various cellular functions and are often evaluated using absorption and fluorescence spectroscopies. For instance, by employing fluorescent probes that exhibit spectra reflective of the surrounding membrane environment, one can estimate the membrane polarity. Thus, elucidating how such probes are embedded within the membranes would be beneficial for enabling a deeper interpretation of the spectra. Here, we apply molecular dynamics (MD) simulation with an enhanced sampling method to investigate the embedded state of 6-propionyl-2-dimethylaminonaphthalene (Prodan) within a membrane composed of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC), as well as its variation upon the addition of ethanol as a cosolvent to the aqueous phase. In the absence of ethanol, it is found that the bulky moieties of Prodan (propionyl and dimethylamine groups) prefer to be oriented toward the membrane center owing to the voids existing near the center. The structural change in the membrane induced by the addition of ethanol causes a reduction in the void population near the center, resulting in a diminished orientation preference of Prodan.

[93]. [*The Club Sandwich: Gapless Phases and Phase Transitions with Non-Invertible Symmetries*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17322 "The Club Sandwich: Gapless Phases and Phase Transitions with Non-Invertible Symmetries")
Lakshya Bhardwaj, Lea E. Bottini, Daniel Pajer, Sakura Schafer-Nameki
We provide a generalization of the Symmetry Topological Field Theory (SymTFT) framework to characterize phase transitions and gapless phases with categorical symmetries. The central tool is the club sandwich, which extends the SymTFT setup to include an interface between two topological orders: there is a symmetry boundary, which is gapped, and a physical boundary that may be gapless, but in addition, there is also a gapped interface in the middle. The club sandwich generalizes so-called Kennedy-Tasaki (KT) transformations. Building on the results in [1, 2] on gapped phases with categorical symmetries, we construct gapless theories describing phase transitions with non-invertible symmetries by applying suitable KT transformations on known phase transitions provided by the critical Ising model and the 3-state Potts model. We also describe in detail the order parameters in these gapless theories characterizing the phase transitions, which are generally mixtures of conventional and string-type order parameters mixed together by the action of categorical symmetries. Additionally, removing the physical boundary from the club sandwiches results in club quiches, which characterize all possible gapped boundary phases with (possibly non-invertible) symmetries that can arise on the boundary of a bulk gapped phase. We also provide a mathematical characterization of gapped boundary phases with symmetries as pivotal tensor functors whose targets are pivotal multi-fusion categories.

[94]. [*Anomalous radiation reaction in a circularly polarized field*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07664 "Anomalous radiation reaction in a circularly polarized field")
O. V. Kibis
Quantum corrections to electron dynamics in a circularly polarized electromagnetic field are found within the Floquet theory of periodically driven quantum systems. It is demonstrated that emission of photons by an electron rotating under the field leads to the quantum recoil force acting on the electron perpendicularly to the velocity of its forward movement, which differs crucially from the known classical recoil force directed oppositely to the velocity. Physically, such an anomalous radiation reaction arises from the one-loop QED correction to the photon emission and has no analog within the classical electrodynamics. Possible manifestations of this phenomenon are discussed for electrons in strong laser fields.

[95]. [*Subsystem Evolution Speed as Indicator of Relaxation*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17798 "Subsystem Evolution Speed as Indicator of Relaxation")
Jiaju Zhang, M. A. Rajabpour, Markus Heyl, Reyhaneh Khasseh
In studying the time evolution of isolated many-body quantum systems, a key focus is determining whether the system undergoes relaxation and reaches a steady state at a given point in time. Traditional approaches often rely on specific local operators or a detailed understanding of the stationary state. In this letter, we introduce an alternative method that assesses relaxation directly from the time-dependent state by focusing on the evolution speed of the subsystem. The proposed indicator evaluates the rate of change in the reduced density matrix of the subsystem over time. We demonstrate that in systems reaching relaxation, as the overall system size increases, the evolution speed of sufficiently small yet still finite-sized subsystems notably diminishes. This leads to small fluctuations in the expectation values of operators, which is also consistent with the predictions made by the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. We apply this approach across various models, including the chaotic Ising chain, XXZ chains with and without many-body localization, and the transverse field Ising chain. Our results confirm the robustness and accuracy of subsystem evolution speed as a reliable indicator for relaxation.

[96]. [*Scaling of Stochastic Normalizing Flows in $\mathrm{SU}(3)$ lattice gauge theory*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.00200 "Scaling of Stochastic Normalizing Flows in $\mathrm{SU}(3)$ lattice gauge theory")
Andrea Bulgarelli, Elia Cellini, Alessandro Nada
Non-equilibrium Markov Chain Monte Carlo (NE-MCMC) simulations provide a well-understood framework based on Jarzynski's equality to sample from a target probability distribution. By driving a base probability distribution out of equilibrium, observables are computed without the need to thermalize. If the base distribution is characterized by mild autocorrelations, this approach provides a way to mitigate critical slowing down. Out-of-equilibrium evolutions share the same framework of flow-based approaches and they can be naturally combined into a novel architecture called Stochastic Normalizing Flows (SNFs). In this work we present the first implementation of SNFs for $\mathrm{SU}(3)$ lattice gauge theory in 4 dimensions, defined by introducing gauge-equivariant layers between out-of-equilibrium Monte Carlo updates. The core of our analysis is focused on the promising scaling properties of this architecture with the degrees of freedom of the system, which are directly inherited from NE-MCMC. Finally, we discuss how systematic improvements of this approach can realistically lead to a general and yet efficient sampling strategy at fine lattice spacings for observables affected by long autocorrelation times.

[97]. [*Fully independent response in disordered solids*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05031 "Fully independent response in disordered solids")
Mengjie Zu, Aayush Desai, Carl P. Goodrich
Unlike in crystals, it is difficult to trace emergent material properties of amorphous solids to their underlying structure. Nevertheless, one can tune features of a disordered spring network, ranging from bulk elastic constants to specific allosteric responses, through highly precise alterations of the structure. This has been understood through the notion of independent bond-level response -- the observation that in many cases, different springs have different effects on different properties. While this idea has motivated inverse design in numerous contexts, it has not been formalized and quantified in a general context that not just informs but enables and predicts inverse design. Here, we show how to quantify independent response by linearizing the simultaneous change in multiple emergent features, and introduce the much stronger notion of fully independent response. Remarkably, we find that the mechanical properties of disordered solids are always fully independent across a wide array of scenarios, regardless of the target features, tunable parameters, and details of particle-particle interactions. Furthermore, our formulation quantifies the susceptibility of feature changes to parameter changes, which we find to be correlated with the maximum linear tunability. These results formalize our understanding of a key fundamental difference between ordered and disordered solids while also creating a practical tool to both understand and perform inverse design.

[98]. [*Precise Quantum Chemistry calculations with few Slater Determinants*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14502 "Precise Quantum Chemistry calculations with few Slater Determinants")
Clemens Giuliani, Jannes Nys, Rocco Martinazzo, Giuseppe Carleo, Riccardo Rossi
Slater determinants have underpinned quantum chemistry for nearly a century, yet their full potential has remained challenging to exploit. In this work, we show that a variational wavefunction composed of a few hundred optimized non-orthogonal determinants can achieve energy accuracies comparable to the state of the art. This is obtained by introducing an optimization method that leverages the quadratic dependence of the variational energy on the orbitals of each determinant, enabling an exact iterative optimization, and uses an efficient tensor-contraction algorithm to evaluate the effective Hamiltonian with a computational cost that scales as the fourth power of the number of basis functions. We benchmark the accuracy of the proposed method with exact full-configuration interaction results where available, and we achieve lower variational energies than coupled cluster (CCSD(T)) for several molecules in the double-zeta basis.

[99]. [*Cavity-enhanced spectroscopy of individual nuclear spins in a dense bath*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12957 "Cavity-enhanced spectroscopy of individual nuclear spins in a dense bath")
Alexander Ulanowski, Olivier Kuijpers, Benjamin Merkel, Adrian Holz\"apfel, Andreas Reiserer
Echo-based spectroscopy of the superhyperfine interaction of an electronic spin with nuclear spins in its surroundings enables detailed insights into the microscopic magnetic environment of spins in solids. Still, it is an outstanding challenge to resolve individual nuclear spins in a dense bath, in which many of them exhibit a comparable coupling strength. This simultaneously requires a high spectral resolution and a large signal-to-noise ratio. However, when probing spin ensembles, dipolar interactions between the dopants can lead to a concentration-dependent trade-off between resolution and signal. Here, we fully eliminate this limitation of previous optical-echo-envelope-modulation spectroscopy experiments by integrating the emitters into a high-finesse resonator, which allows for strong optical echoes even at very low concentrations. To demonstrate its potential, the technique is applied to erbium dopants in yttrium-orthosilicate (Er:YSO). Achieving an unprecedented spectral resolution enables precise measurements of the superhyperfine interaction with four of the Y nuclear spins densely surrounding each emitter. The achieved boost of the signal, enabled by the resonator, allows for extending the approach to the lowest concentration possible -- to the level of single dopants, thereby providing a tool for detecting and studying individual nuclear spins. Thus, our technique paves the way for an improved understanding of dense nuclear spin baths in solids.

[100]. [*Network Sampling: An Overview and Comparative Analysis*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.17701 "Network Sampling: An Overview and Comparative Analysis")
Quoc Chuong Nguyen
Network sampling is a crucial technique for analyzing large or partially observable networks. However, the effectiveness of different sampling methods can vary significantly depending on the context. In this study, we empirically compare representative methods from three main categories: node-based, edge-based, and exploration-based sampling. We used two real-world datasets for our analysis: a scientific collaboration network and a temporal message-sending network. Our results indicate that no single sampling method consistently outperforms the others in both datasets. Although advanced methods tend to provide better accuracy on static networks, they often perform poorly on temporal networks, where simpler techniques can be more effective. These findings suggest that the best sampling strategy depends not only on the structural characteristics of the network but also on the specific metrics that need to be preserved or analyzed. Our work offers practical insights for researchers in choosing sampling approaches that are tailored to different types of networks and analytical objectives.

[101]. [*SA-GAT-SR: Self-Adaptable Graph Attention Networks with Symbolic Regression for high-fidelity material property prediction*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00625 "SA-GAT-SR: Self-Adaptable Graph Attention Networks with Symbolic Regression for high-fidelity material property prediction")
Liu Junchi, Tang Ying, Tretiak Sergei, Duan Wenhui, Zhou Liujiang
Recent advances in machine learning have demonstrated an enormous utility of deep learning approaches, particularly Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for materials science. These methods have emerged as powerful tools for high-throughput prediction of material properties, offering a compelling enhancement and alternative to traditional first-principles calculations. While the community has predominantly focused on developing increasingly complex and universal models to enhance predictive accuracy, such approaches often lack physical interpretability and insights into materials behavior. Here, we introduce a novel computational paradigm, Self-Adaptable Graph Attention Networks integrated with Symbolic Regression (SA-GAT-SR), that synergistically combines the predictive capability of GNNs with the interpretative power of symbolic regression. Our framework employs a self-adaptable encoding algorithm that automatically identifies and adjust attention weights so as to screen critical features from an expansive 180-dimensional feature space while maintaining O(n) computational scaling. The integrated SR module subsequently distills these features into compact analytical expressions that explicitly reveal quantum-mechanically meaningful relationships, achieving 23 times acceleration compared to conventional SR implementations that heavily rely on first principle calculations-derived features as input. This work suggests a new framework in computational materials science, bridging the gap between predictive accuracy and physical interpretability, offering valuable physical insights into material behavior.

